Tuning the 009 Distributor/34 PICT Carburetor Combination
Tuning the 009 
                    Distributor/
34 PICT Carburetor Combination
This 
                    problem is discussed in depth in our
Hesitation
article.
See also our article on
Carburetor/Distributor 
                    Matchup
.
Miscellaneous questions and answers are featured here.
~~~
Someone 
                  wrote with problems with the 34PICT/3 carburetor on his 1600cc twin-port engine (new manifold boots 
                  and gaskets, new plugs and leads, 009 centrifugal-advance distributor).
"I have read lots on the common "flat spot" problem (stumbling 
                  at low-rpm acceleration) and have tried the adjustments, but 
                  I still have the flat spot. I have opened up carburetor and 
                  checked the float, needle valve and seat -- all okay. I also 
                  cleaned and blew out all visible rubbish. The motor seems to 
                  idle okay, but it spits and coughs when accelerating. If I up 
                  the size of the main jet and idle jet by one size or two will 
                  this help?"
Rob 
                  responded - "Carburetor troubles can be related to all sorts 
                  of things -- fouled plugs, bad plugs, bad or weak coils, blocked 
                  fuel filters, damaged accelerator pump diaphragm, etc., etc. But a significant source of "flat spot" 
                  trouble stems from the combination of the 34 PICT/3 carburetor 
                  and the 009 centrifugal-advance distributor. We discuss this 
                  problem in depth in our article on
Hesitation
. 
                  Also in that article is a reference to John Connolly's
(Aircooled.Net)
excellent article on
Choosing the 
                  Right Distributor
. John recommends the single-vacuum dual-advance 
                  (SVDA) distributor for use with the 34 PICT/3 carburetor. This style of 
                  distributor was used outside the USA from 1971 onwards and inside the USA from 1974 onwards, on all 1600 twin port engines."
Someone 
                  wrote with a suggestion that many people try, but we don't recommend.  
                  Here's what he says to do to get rid of the "flat spot - The answer to your problem is simple. If you 
                  don’t care about fuel consumption too much, run a 1/16th drill 
                  bit through the main jet. Try it as it works, and easy to get 
                  another jet if you don’t like the fuel consumption. And as for 
                  your 009 distributor, if you see a 050 for sale BUY it.
Rob 
                  responded to the jet drilling suggestion - "I 
                  hope that "1/16th drill" wasn't serious??? That's X158.75 in 
                  Solex jet size equivalent!!! The normal jet size for a 34PICT/3 
                  with vacuum distributor is X127.5 and with a 009 distributor 
                  is X130 or X132.5 at most. With an X158.75 main jet you'd have about 
                  24% increase in fuel consumption!"
The 
                  guy responded (paraphrased) - "Yes, my suggestion to drill the 
                  main jet with a 1/16" drill was serious. As I said, if you don’t 
                  care for the fuel consumption you will find that it works. Try 
                  it -- its only a jet."
Rob - " it's not "only" a jet!
                  I wonder if you realise just how BIG 1/16th is (hence 
                  the Solex size equivalent I noted.) If drilled to 1/16th" the 
                  jet will supply so much excess fuel that you'll have...
About 
                    24% increase in fuel consumption -- worse than the average 
                    5 litre carburetted V8.
Serious sooty 
                    plug fouling.
Serious 
                    wash-down of the oil film on the cylinder walls, resulting 
                    in massively increased wear.
Oil 
                    dilution and contamination (more wear).
A visibly smokey 
                    exhaust (the cops may be interested).
The VW engine was originally designed 
                    for an engine life without major repairs of about 2,000 hours or about 100,000 km.
                    You wont get anywhere near that if you wash the oil film off the cylinder walls and 
                    add a load of absrasive soot to the cylinders with a super-rich mixture.Need 
                  I go on?"
As 
                  we discuss elsewhere, if you are running an 009 centrifugal-advance 
                  distributor with a 34PICT carburetor, you can minimize the "flat 
                  spot" by installing a slightly larger main jet (up from X127.5 
                  to X130 or X132.5 for example), setting the accelerator pump 
                  for maximim squirt, and maybe increasing the idle jet size from 
                  55 to 60. Then set the maximum distributor advance to as much 
                  of the 28-32 degrees BTDC as it can take without the engine 
                  detonating/pinging. We might need to increase fuel consumption a 
                  little to compensate for the 009 flat spot, but only as much as needed, 
                  otherwise you compromised your engine life, and add unnecssary polution to the atmosphere.
Some 
                  have recommended filling in the throttle butterfly bleed hole. This 
                  should only be tried if the above modifications don't eliminate 
                  the flat spot. Doing so results in the carburetor running extra 
                  rich at low and middle speeds (butterfly closed or slightly 
                  open), as it allows less air to "leak" through the throat without 
                  sucking in fuel. So filling the hole mean less air for the same 
                  fuel pulled through the jets. It won't harm the engine any more 
                  than other run-rich methods needed to work with the 009 distributor, 
                  but if you expect the engine to last a long time then be aware 
                  that running rich (which you NEED to do with the 009), results 
                  in oil wash-down in the cylinders which will speed piston ring 
                  wear somewhat.
For 
                  best overall performance, we have found that the 34PICT carburetor/SVDA 
                  distributor is the combination of choice. For more information, 
                  please see John Connolly's article on
Choosing 
                  the Right Distributor
. (John Connolly is the owner/manager 
                  of
Aircooled.Net
.)
Design by
Erin