Adjusting the 30PICT/2 Carburettor
Solex 30 PICT/2 Carburetor Adjustment 
                  Procedures
This procedure also applies to the 30PICT/1 and 28
series carburettors having a single adjusting screw
on the side of the carburettor.
~~~
Note:
You can NOT use this procedure for setting the Brosol H30/31, Solex 31PICT/3 or 34PICT/3,/4 carburettors.
		Those carburettors use a different adjustment technique altogether.
		For those you must use the other tune up procedure on this site.  
                -
Note:
Before you begin to adjust the carburetor, the valves, points, 
                and timing should be set. This is important, and they should be 
                set in the order given below -- start with the engine cold, and 
                finish with it warm. These topics are addressed in the following 
                -
Setting 
                  the Valves
Setting 
                  the Points
Setting 
                  the Timing
Checking 
                  the Choke
Adjusting 
                  the Carburetor
~~~
Setting 
                the Valves
Note:
See our
procedure for adjusting the 
                  valves
.
The 
                engine must be completely cold to set the valves.
0.004 
                inches is the factory setting for pre-1971 engines. Some folks 
                find that results in the valves being too tight when the engine 
                warms up, and use 0.006 inches.
Note:
1971 and up engines use 0.006 inches. The aim of the tappet setting 
                is to provide virtually no gap when the engine is at operating 
                temperature.
~~~
Setting 
                the Points
Note:
See our
procedure for setting 
                  the points
.
Now 
                set the points at 0.016 inches. If they are pitted or damaged, 
                or if the rubbing block is badly worn, replace them. Put a small 
                dab of grease on the cam lobes whilst you are at it. Also pull 
                off the rotor arm and have a look at the spindle it sits on. If 
                there is a felt pad in there (some have it, some don't), put a 
                few drops of oil (engine oil is fine) on the pad to help lubricate 
                the distributor. Don't overdo it - just a few drops.
~~~
Setting 
                  the Timing
Note:
See our
procedure for setting 
                  the timing
.
The 
                usual timing is as follows:
1200cc 
                with single vacuum distributor - 10BTDC (Before Top Dead Center). 
                This is set with the engine off (static timing).
1300/1500/1600cc 
                with single vacuum distributor - 7.5BTDC. This is set with the 
                engine off (static timing). In the USA, the 67-69 1500 engines used O degrees 
		advance - TDC, with the single vacuum single advance distributor, as an 
		early emissions control measure.
1300/1600cc 
                with double vacuum distributor - 5ATDC (After Top Dead Center). 
                This is set with the engine idling, so that the retard vacuum 
                line is operating. These engines originally used a 31PICT/3 (1300) or 
		34PICT/3 (1600) carburettor which come with at least two vacuum ports, 
		so it would be unlikely to see a double vacuum 
                distributor on a vehicle equiped with a 30PICT/2 or earlier carburettor, 
                as these have only one vacuum point on them; so this last paragragh 
                is included just to point out the difference in the double vacuum 
                set-up. It is conceivable to use a double vacuum distributor with 
                the retard vacuum line disabled, (then using the 7.5BTDC setting), 
                but the advance curve of this distributor may not suit the earlier 
                carburettor/engine set-up.
Note:
ALL, repeat ALL
VW aircooled engines using the Bosch 009 or other centrifugal 
                advance distributor must be set at 28-32 BTDC at 3000+rpm. It is important 
                to set the 009 at the maximum advance point - the total advance 
                varies on them, and the maximum advance is more important than 
                the idle, which usually ends up somewhere in the 5-10 BTDC range.
		Use as much of the 28-32 degrees as the engine can take without 
		detonating/pinging, but never use less than 28 degrees - if the engine still 
		detonates/pings ay 28 degrees, use a higher octane fuel and 
		advance the timing to 30 or 32 degrees if possible.
It 
                is very common to see the 009 distributor being used as a replacement 
                for the original vacuum distributors (which can be hard to find), 
                but you should note that the 009 was originally designed to work with industrial VW
		engines running compressors, generators and the like, which were relatively
		constant speed engines.  They were not developed for road going engines
		with their constant changes in load and rpm, 
                and they were never used on beetles by VW. They do work, but not as 
                well as the appropriate vacuum distributor - often leading to 
                flat spots on acceleration, and a lack of 'pick-up'. Because they 
                have a lower maximum advance amount compared to vacuum distributors 
                (which can provide up to 40-42 degrees advance under the right 
                conditions), 009s will result in slightly increased fuel consumption.
~~~
Checking 
                  the Choke
Note:
See our
procedure for adjusting the automatic 
                  choke
.
Now 
                warm the engine up, take the aircleaner off the top of the carby 
                (if it's the oil filled kind be careful, you don't need a shoe 
                full of oil) and check that the choke butterfly is standing vertical. 
                If it isn't, run the engine some more to make sure it's throughly 
                warm, and check the choke butterfly again. If it is not standing 
                vertical, the butterfly needs adjusting or fixing (another topic). 
                It's important to set the valves, points timing and check the 
                choke before setting the carburettor, they all work together for 
                a smooth running engine.
~~~
Adjusting the Carburettor
The Brosol 30/31 Carburetor
~~~
There is a lever on the left side (left is left 
                side of car) with a cable connected to it. This is the
Throttle 
                Lever
.
On the throttle lever is a small screw which sticks 
                out towards the back of the car. This is the
Idle Adjustment 
                Screw
.
The Idle Adjustment Screw rests on a strange-looking 
                flat piece of metal with steps cut in it. This is the
Fast 
                Idle Cam
, and works with the choke to give a reliable idle 
                on a cold engine.
The engine must be warm to set the carby, so that 
                the choke is off, and the
Idle Adjustment Screw
is sitting 
                at the bottom of these steps (at the BOTTOM, not on any of the 
                steps themselves). Directly beneath the fast idle cam on the left 
                side of the carburetor you will see a small diameter screw with a spring wrapped 
		around it.  This is the
Volume Control Screw
which is used to adjust
		the idle mixture.
On the right side of the carburetor body is a barrel-shaped 
                object, about the size of a pen-light battery, with a wire connected 
                to the outer end. This is the
Idle Fuel Cutoff Valve
(solenoid). 
                This shuts of the fuel when you turn off the engine, to prevent 
                'running on'. Be sure the wire is connected and runs to the (+) 
                terminal on the coil. (This usually runs off the same wire which 
                attaches to the choke.)
Also make sure that this solenoid is screwed into 
                the carby snuggly, and not rattling loose. Don't overtighten it 
                though, it's got a fine brass thread and screws into aluminium 
                - both quite soft metals. You can test the operation of this solenoid 
                very easily. Turn on the ignition, and pull off the wire on the 
                valve. Touch the wire on the connector, and you should hear a 
                clicking sound as the valve inside moves. If not, check for 12 
                volts on the wire (small trouble light, voltmeter etc), and replace 
                the solenoid if required - if it's not working, you won't get 
                a proper idle, and you'll get rough running at traffic speeds 
                too.
As stated previously, make sure your engine is 
                warm and the choke butterfly standing upright. Make sure the air 
                cleaner is ON when adjusting the carburettor--the engine expects 
                it to be there.
Turn 
                  the small
Volume Control Screw
in all the way - GENTLY PLEASE. 
                  It is a needle valve, and you don't want to enlarge the hole 
                  by forcing it home. Now unscrew it 2.5 turns. This is the starting 
                  point for the adjustment.
Start 
                  the engine, and turn the
Idle Adjustment Screw
in or 
                  out to set the idle at 850 RPM. I'll let you work out how to 
                  measure 850 rpm - but it's a fast idle. The VW uses a slightly higher 
		 idle speed than many other engines in order to keep the fan spinning fast 
		enough to cool the engine. (See our
idle 
                  adjustment procedure
.)
Then 
                  turn the
Volume Control Screw
in slowly until the engine 
                  speed begins to drop, then turn it out until the engine runs 
                  at its highest idle speed. It should still be within about ½ 
                  turn from the start setting of 2.5 turns. If the hole has been 
                  damaged by a previous careless person, you'll just have to do 
                  the best you can. Now screw it in until the revs 'just' start 
                  to drop - about 30rpm. This might be as little as 1/8th of a turn. 
		  This is the final setting.
Reset 
                  the idle speed again with the
Idle Adjustment Screw
. 
                  Don't slow the idle too much, 800-850 is about right. As noted above, VWs need 
                  a few revs at idle to keep the cooling air flowing, otherwise 
                  when you coast to a stop at the lights after cruising at a good 
                  speed, your hot engine won't get enough cooling air, and it 
                  won't like you very much.
That's 
                it - you're done. It should be purring like a kitten now.
- 
                Rob Boardman
Adelaide Australia
* 
                  * * * *
Design by
Erin