SOLEX 34 PICT/3 Carburetor Adjustment Procedures
Basic
								Tuneup, and Adjustment of the Solex 34 PICT/3 Carburetor
This
								method will also work for the 30PICT/3, 30PICT/4, 31PICT/4,
								31PICT/3 and H30/31 carburetors with the
two adjusting
								screws in the left side.
~~~
Note:
Before we begin to adjust the carburetor, the valves, points,
								and timing should be set. This is important, and they should
								be done in the right order, as you start with a cold engine,
								and end with it warm.
These
								topics are addressed in the following in this document (see
								links below; for more detail, refer to our
Tune-Up
								Procedures
).
Setting
									the Valves
Setting
									the Points
Setting
									the Timing
Checking
									the Choke
Adjusting
									the Carburetor
~~~
Setting
								the Valves
Valve
								adjustment is always done with the engine stone cold.
0.004
								inches (0.1 mm) is the factory setting for pre-71 engines. That includes 
								engines with a number starting B..., D..., E..., F..., H..., L..., or a plain
								number. Some folks find that this is too tight after the engine warms
								and use 0.006 inches (0.15 mm). (I've always used the factory setting on my H...
								engine without any problems.)
0.006
								inches (.15 mm) is used on 71 and up engines. That's engines
								with a number starting AB..., AC..., AD..., AE..., AF...,
								AH..., AJ..., AK..., AR..., AS....
The
								aim of the tappet (valve) setting is to provide virtually NO
								gap when the engine is at operating temperature.
~~~
Setting
								the Points
The
								points are adjusted to .016 inches (0.4 mm). Replace them if
								the contacts are pitted or the cam rubbing block is badly
								worn. Add a touch of grease to the cam lobs at the same time.
								Also pull off the rotor arm and take a look in the centre of
								the spindle it rides on. If your distributor has a felt pad
								in there, put a few drops of oil (engine oil is fine) on it
								to lubricate the distributor drive - don't overdo it though -
								a few drops only. Some distributors don't have this felt pad
								- in that case skip this procedure.
~~~
Setting
								the Timing
Please
								note that the SIZE of the engine does not matter much when
								setting the timing, it's the DISTRIBUTOR design which
								determines the settings. The compression ratio also plays a
								part – the early low compression engines need a little
								more advance, and the later higher compression engines
								usually have a little less advance.
The
								usual timing settings are:
1200
									engines with single vacuum distributor - 10BTDC. This is set
									static - engine off (or at idle with a timing light and the
									vacuum line disconnected).
1300/1500/1600
									engines with single vacuum distributor - 7.5BTDC. This is
									set static - engine off (or at idle with a timing light and
									the vacuum line disconnected). In the USA, 68-70 cars with
									the H (1500) and B (1600) series engines and a single vacuum
									distributor used zero advance – TDC - as an idle
									setting, as an early attempt at emissions reduction. This
									also reduced the maximum advance at higher revs. Many folks
									have found that the 7.5BTDC setting as used outside the USA
									works fine (single vacuum distributor).
Engines
									using the double vacuum distributor (first introduced in
									1971) - 5ATDC, as a further atempt to reduce emissions at idle. 
									This must be set using a timing light, with 
									the engine idling and the vacuum lines connected so the
									retard line can pull in the 5ADTC (After TDC). These
									distributors were not used much outside the USA.  In other
									countries, the 1971 engine had a single vacuum double
									advance distributor, which was then fitted to USA cars from
									1974 onwards.
Note:
ANY, repeat ANY
VW aircooled engine using the Bosch
								009 (or other centrifugal distributor) must be set at the
								maximum advance with the engine at 3000+rpm, and let the idle
								advance fall where it may. The reason for this is that the
								009s vary in the total amount of advance they make, and the
								maximum advance is more important than idle advance. The
								normal setting is a max advance of 28-32 BTDC. Try the 32
								degree setting first.  If the engine detonates/pings at this
								setting, reduce it to 30 degrees and try again. If it still
								detonates/pings at 28 degrees, use a higher octane fuel.  Don't use less
								than 28 degrees. The idle advance will then usually fall in
								at about 5-10BTDC. Please note that the 009 was designed to
								be used on VW industrial engines (generators, compressors and
								such, which ran at near constant speeds).  It was never designed 
								for engines used on the road with their continually varying load and rpms. 
								VW never used the 009 distributor for any of it's beetle models, and so,
								although it will work, you may get flat spots and poor
								pick-up when using this distributor. Because it actually has less total advance 
								than most vacuum distributors which can provide up to about 40-42 degrees 
								when the engine needs it, the 009 will usually have worse fuel economy too.
~~~
Checking
								the Choke
Now
								start the engine and warm it up. Take the air cleaner off the
								top of the carburetor (if it's the oil filled type be
								careful, you don't want a shoe full of oil) and check that
								the choke butterfly is standing vertical. If it isn't, run
								the engine some more to make sure it's thoroughly warm, and
								check the choke butterfly again. If it is not standing
								vertical or almost vertical, the butterfly needs adjusting or
								fixing (another topic).
It's
								important to set the valves, points, timing and check the
								choke (in this order) before setting the carburetor, they all
								work together for a smooth running engine.
~~~
Setting
								the 34PICT/3 Carburetor
Reminder
								- this adjustment procedure also works for the other
								carburettors with two adjusting screws in the left side –
								the 30PICT/3, the 31PICT/3 and the H30/31.
Before
								we begin,
a short note about the "Haynes VW Beetle &
								Karmann Ghia Repair Manual": For those using the earlier
								edition of the manual, there is an error on the exploded
								views of the 34PICT/3 carburetor. The designations on the
								adjustment screws on the left side of the carburetor are
								reversed. The larger screw on the top is the Bypass Screw,
								and the lower (smaller) one is the Volume Control Screw - not
								the other way around as the older Haynes Manual indicates.
								Other than that, we have found the Haynes Manual to be an
								excellent resource.
Note:
The correct idle speed is important with the 34PICT/3
								carburetor, which is more complicated (and more sensitive)
								than the earlier types. It has three separate fuel circuits
								in it (only two in older carburetors), and the 850-900 rpm
								idle is designed so the airflow through the carburetor is
								balanced for the idle circuit fuel flow. That's why it has
								both Volume and Bypass screws in the side (the earlier ones
								had only Volume screws), located on the left side of the
								carburetor. This way the idle speed can be set correctly
								using the Bypass screw without touching the screw on the
								throttle arm, which has to be set exactly right.
Make
									sure that all the hoses are in place and the gasket at the
									base of the carburetor is sealing properly (no vacuum leak).
Install
									the air cleaner (the carburetor expects it to be there).
Turn
									on the engine and run it until it is warm, then switch it
									off.
The
									first step is to set the throttle plate. Back off the
Fast
									Idle Adjuster
(also called the throttle screw) located at
									the top of the throttle arm. You will find the throttle arm
									on the left side of the carburetor, connected at the bottom
									to the accelerator cable, which runs forward to the
									accelerator pedal.
Note:
Fast Idle Adjuster
is something of a misnomer - this screw it is NOT used
									to adjust the idle speed. The
Fast Idle Adjuster
works with
									the choke to give a smooth idle on a cold engine. As the
									choke warms (in lock step with the warming engine, hopefully)
									the choke butterfly valve in the throat of the carburetor
									opens and the
Fast Idle Adjuster
screw moves down the steps
									of the choke fast idle cam, reducing the cold-engine idle
									speed down to the warm-engine idle speed. Screwing the
Fast
									Idle Adjuster Screw
in more will increase the idle speed,
									but doing so messes up the
Volume Control
and
Bypass Screw
adjustments. This destroys the idle geometry, and the car
									won't run right.
Slowly
									turn the
Fast Idle Adjuster
screw in until it JUST touches
									the bottom of the stepped cam.  Now screw it in another ¼
									turn.  This sets the throttle butterfly open the required
									0.004", so you get the right airflow past the idle and
									transfer ports in the inside of the carburettor throat.  You
									can now use the
Bypass Screw
(read on) to set the idle speed
									correctly. From this point on, leave the
Fast Idle Adjuster
screw alone.
Next
									set the idle mixture. This is done using the
Volume Control
									Screw
.
Note:
The
Volume Control Screw
is the smaller of the two adjusting
									screws, located on the left side of the carburetor just
									above the Idle Cutoff solenoid (which has a black wire from
									the positive side of the coil attached to it). The
Volume
									Control Screw
is used to set the idle mixture.
Note:
Before setting the
Volume Control Screw
per the step below,
									turn the
Bypass Screw
(the larger screw in the left side) out 2.5 
									full turns, which is the initial setting.
Screw
									the
Volume Control Screw
in GENTLY until it bottoms out -
									you don't want to open up the hole. Now unscrew it exactly
									2.5 full turns. This is the initial setting.
Note:
Though you want to be careful to not screw the
Volume
									Control Screw
in too far, you also want to make sure that it
									is initially firmly seated before unscrewing it as
									specified. If you don't start with the
Volume Control Screw
firmly seated, you may have trouble adjusting the idle with
									the
Bypass Screw
, to the point where you may have it turned
									all the way in and still have the idle too high. This
									condition will cause stumbling on acceleration if not
									corrected.
With
									the
Volume Control Screw
out 2-1/2 turns, start the engine
									and let it warm up. (Make sure the automatic choke is fully
									open – pull and release the throttle arm if needed so
									the stepped cam rotates and the
Fast Idle Adjuster
is
									sitting at the bottom of the stepped cam.)
Now
									to set the idle speed. This is done by using the
Bypass Screw
. The
Bypass Screw
is larger than the
Volume Control Screw
and is
									located a little above and to the left of the
Volume Screw
.
Note:
Again, the idle speed is NOT set with the
Fast Idle Adjuster
on the top of the throttle arm as it is on the older 28 and
									30 series carburetors - though its name (Fast Idle Adjuster)
									would lead you to think that its used to set the idle.
As
									a starting point, turn the larger
Bypass Screw
whichever way
									(most likely out) to set the idle at 850 rpm (fast idle if
									you don't have a tachometer). For a semi-automatic car, use
									900 rpm. (It's far better to have the idle speed a little
									fast than too slow.)
Note:
See our
Tune-Up Procedure
for
									instructions on how to attach and use a dwell-tachometer.
With
									the engine warmed up, idling at about 850rpm, and the choke fully open, go back to
									the
Volume Screw
and adjust it slowly to obtain the fastest
									(smoothest running) idle speed (this is usually out -
									counter-clockwise). You should not usually need to turn the
									screw out much outside the range of 2-3 turns (1/2 turn
									in/out from the basic 2-1/2 turn out setting).
Then
									turn the
Volume Control
screw back IN (clockwise) very
									slowly until the engine speed drops by about 20-30 rpm. If
									you don't have a tachometer, listen until you can just hear
									the engine speed start to drop, maybe as little as 1/8th
									turn on the
Volume Screw
.
Go
									back to the larger
Bypass screw
again to reset the idle
									speed to 850 - 900rpm. (Again, a little fast is better than
									too slow. Too slow of an idle speed can cause the engine to
									overheat when you stop at the lights after a good run, as
									the cooling fan will not be producing enough cooling air to
									cope with the residual heat in the engine.)
Note:
If you find it difficult or impossible to make these
									settings, it is possible that you could have stripped
									threads on any of these adjusters, a damaged hole for the
									tapered screw, or a damaged needle valve or O-ring.
It
									is also possible that you have a vacuum leak (i.e., leaking
									of air into the intake manifold). If there are any
									holes/gaps in the manifold or at any of the connection
									points, then air can be sucked into the manifold, causing
									the fuel-to-air mixture to become too lean. This can cause
									(among other things) adjustment of the carburetor
									impossible. See our
Discussion
									of Air Inleakage
, which includes diagnosis and repair.
That's
								it - you're done. Your engine should be purring like a
								kitten!
*
								* * * *
Design
								by
Erin