Converting a 6 volt system to 12 volts
Conversion:  6-Volts to 12-Volts
~~~
Someone wrote regarding the conversion of a 
                  VW 6-volt electrical system to 12 volts - I know virtually nothing 
                  about this conversion, so I would want to know a little about 
                  it before I do it or have someone do it for me. I know that 
                  it will effect many components, like the wiper motor, for instance 
                  (as I recall). And I also know that there are some out there 
                  who ask, "Why do it?"
Rob responded - The conversion from 6 to 12 
                  volts is not hard. The 6-volt wiring is thicker than the 12-volt 
                  wiring so can handle 12 volts without any changes. The fuses 
                  need to be changed to 12-volt ratings though - mostly 8 and 
                  16 amps (the 6-volt ratings are too high).
You need to change EVERY light bulb to 12 volts 
                  including the dash lights and indicator lights (gen, oil) etc.
The regulator must be 12 volts (unless you are 
                  going to use a 12-volt alternator with internal regulator in 
                  which case the external regulator can be removed altogether).
The wiper motor will work at warp speed and 
                  overrun the auto-park feature unless you reduce it's speed. 
                  Some folks use a high-amp resistor, but this gets really hot. 
                  There's a neat little current-limiter circuit on our web site 
                  which works MUCH better. See our article on
Running 
                  Your 6-Volt Wipers on 12 Volts
. The circuit has only four 
                  components and can be made by anyone who can use a soldering 
                  iron.
The starter motor can stay at 6 volts - it will 
                  work very well on 12 volts, spinning the engine faster, and 
                  it won't overheat unless you crank for long periods.
The fuel tank sender might need altering too 
                  (e.g., the 12-volt sender may not fit).
"Speedy Jim"
is certainly a guru with VW electrics, and his site,
Speedy 
                  Jim's Home Page
, has a wealth of useful information - worth 
                  a look.
Design by
Erin