About Dave
A little about
            Dave...
Sadly, Dave passed away on 28 January 2019, after a long illness.  He died in hospital with his wife
                  at his side. Dave and I had been friends for over 20 years, and I miss him already.  He was a gentle, hard working family man.
                  Though we live in different countries we had a rapport which was hard to match, and our mutual interest in our
                  old VW beetles, lead us to the  building of this site.  My thanks to Dave's daughter Erin for her work -
                  she and Dave produced the site as you see it today.
I will continue to administer this site as a tribute to Dave.
He is survived by his Wife Sharon and their four children.
RIP Dave.
A
                graduate of the "School of Hard Knocks,"
who has learned the hard way the truth of Pogo's
                wisdom -
"We have met the enemy and he is US!"
Dave
Dave
                    writes -- Unlike my Aussie friend Rob, I'm an American, living
                    in the state of Washington (on the dry side of the Cascade
                    Mountains). I'm not a trained mechanic either -- I'm a retired
                    environmental scientist -- just an old geezer (I turned 65
                    this year, 2009) who loves aircooled Volkswagens and has spent
                    a fair amount of time tinkering with them. My love affair
                    with VW Bugs dates from about 1968 (age 24), when in quick
                    succession I owned three VW Beetles (Type 1) of early 1960s
                    vintage. My wife Sharon and I courted in my little 1965 Beetle,
                    which we called "Herbie" - the "Love Bug." :-) She says
                    I paid more attention to the Bug ("fondling fenders and caressing
                    carburetors") than I did to her! But she married me anyway,
                    and has been very indulgent with my Bug fetish over the years.
Since
                    then Sharon and I have owned a 1971 Squareback (Type 4) and a 1977
                    Bus (Type 2), but my first love will always be the aircooled
                    Beetle.
In June 1997 I returned to "Beetle mania" when my son purchased
                    a beautiful little black 1973 Super Beetle (with many, many
                    problems - far more than we realized when he bought it!). My son and I
                    just got started with some the more urgent repairs when in
                    July 1997 I had to take a little time off to have heart surgery
                    (six coronary artery by-passes!). But I was back working on
                    the Bug in August!
Dave During His First Engine Removal Experience
~~~
What started out as just "tinkering" ended as a complete
rebuild of the car while my son was away for a couple of years.  (A "rebuild," not an actual "restoration," as we weren't totally religious in assuring everything was "stock").  Many of the
Procedures
and a whole lot of the discussion included in these pages are a result of our experiences with the rebuild of this Super Beetle.
We have proven the truth of Pogo's observation: "We has found the enemy, and they is US!" I've certainly learned a lot through the many mistakes I have made!  I'm definitely a graduate of the "School of Hard Knocks!"
Right from the get-go the car was plagued with a severe and
                    very frustrating "stumbling-on-acceleration" problem, which
                    we found was due to a whole host of different things (a problem
                    seldom has one cause). These included
Water
                    in the Gas
,
Clogged Fuel Filter
,
                    incorrect
Tuning
, incorrect
Jets
in the carburetor, incorrect
Accelerator Pump
setting, and most
                    of all, a severe
Vacuum Leak
around the carburetor throttle
                    shaft. A new rebuilt German
34 PICT/3 Carburetor
(427-1 flange) and a matching
SVDA Distributor
, proper adjustment of
                    the
Accelerator Pump
, and installation
                    of a new
Fuel Filter
finally solved the stumbling-on-acceleration
                    problem. (It still rears its ugly head now and then, but it can usually be attributed to one of the foregoing.)
The next problem was the
Transmission
. On
                      the recommendation of Jon Chabot at
TopLine Parts
, we
                      shipped the transmission off to Der Transaxle in Anaheim, California
                      to be rebuilt. We must give credit to our good friend Rachel Morgan
                      at
Western
                        Sintering
, who packaged and shipped the transmission for us.
Amazingly, it was my wife who suggested that we get the car
                      painted! This suggestion launched a job that I hope to never repeat!
                      I took the car all apart and stripped it right down to the bare
                      metal, finding that it had been painted several times before, right
                      over the previous coats. This horrendous process is detailed in our
                      article on
Surface
                        Prep and Paint
. The paint shop finished up the surface prep when
                      I'd had enough, then primed and painted it with several coats of a
                      BMW "Cosmos Black Metallic" paint. I reassembled the car the car
                      myself in a friend's garage -- a much bigger job than I thought it
                      would be!  That process, too, is documented on these pages.
Not long after getting the car out of the paint shop another
                      major problem surfaced. The clutch began slipping, and I found that
                      the car was leaking oil severely. Two-and-two put together said
Main Oil Seal
,
                      failure of which would soak the clutch disk and cause it to slip.
                      Sure enough, when we got the engine out we found the clutch disk
                      soaked with oil and the main seal in shreds. We did a poor-man's
End-Play Check
and found it to be an eighth of an inch -- far more than the spec
                      0.006"! To us that (plus the tell-take circular wear mark in the
                      engine case) said "spun bearing!"
So after stripping off all of the "ancillary components,"
                    we sent the engine off to the shop to have the bearings replaced.
                    While it was there our mechanic found the engine case to be
                    so badly damaged that it needed to be replaced as well. Sigh
                    ... He replaced the crankshaft at the same time; fortunately
                    the cylinders, pistons, rings, valves and heads were still
                    in good shape (at least, so we thought at the time).
When I got the engine back in the car I had another learning
                      experience when we tore into the brakes. We replaced all four of the
                      drums and the brake shoes, but we still had a problem with
                      over-pressurization of the system as it warmed up. So we removed the
                      master cylinder and did a proper bench bleed, releasing a LOT of
                      entrapped air. This experience resulted in another procedure that
                      you will find under the general heading of
The VW Braking
                        System
, specifically
Bench Bleeding the
                          Master Cylinder
.
The problem with
Pressurization of the Braking System
persisted
                    -- later we learned that that problem was caused by our messing
                    with the length of the master cylinder pushrod (see the above
Article
for details). A hard and expensive
                    lesson. Installation of
Disc Brakes
on the front made the brakes
                    rock solid. (Installation of disc brakes on the fun was a very
                    easy and enjoyable job.)
Since the purchase of this car in 1997, I have replaced, rebuilt, or refurbished virtually every
                    component between the front and rear license plates. Significant
                    recent improvements since the rebuild was declared "complete"
                    include the installation of Compu-Fire
Electronic Ignition
, (to go with the Capacitive
                    Discharge Ignition
(CDI) System
that I installed previously), a new
"Mexican-style" Thermostat
, a
Gene Berg Shifter
,
Disc Brakes
on the front, a Pierburg 34PICT/3
                    carburetor purchased from
Aircooled.Net
(later replaced with a rebuilt German 427-1 model purchased from Keith Doncaster (keifernet@hotmail.com),
                    new
Ignition and Turn Signal Switches
,
                    and new insulated
Corrugated Heat Ducts
, and a new Scat steering
                    wheel.
Well, we thought we were done, but we weren't - not by a long
                    shot! In April 2007 the engine completely seized up while
                    I was doing an advance timing test. Once atain my wife flabergasted
                    me when she suggested that I just get a new engine! I purchased a new 1600cc
                    dual-port longblock from
Aircooled.Net
. Then I had the "fun" of "building up"
                    the longblock, which means installing all
                    of "ancillary components" and loading it into the car. In the
                    process I also replaced the crankcase pulley, the fuel pump,
                    most of the engine tin, the intake manifold, the oil cooler,
                    the starter (and "D-bolt" - quite a story there!), the
                    muffler header and muffler, and the battery! It's virtually
                    a new engine, and this car has never run so well. (But only after I replaced the fuel filter.  A clogged filter, I discovered, will cause a stumbling problem that is difficult to diagnose if the fuel filter is neglected.  See our
Fuel Filter
procedure.)
In my obsessive way I documented the entire process and prepared a comprehensive
Longblock Buildup Procedure
- which is very long and includes 30 sub-procedures, which are all included in the
Index.
The car ran beautifully with the new engine, but my euphoria was short-lived.  After having a great time building up the new longblock, I took the car out on the road for a test drive, on a very hot day (95F).  I drove down into Oregon (I live in SE Washington) through Pendleton and then up into the Blue Mountains by way of "Cabbage Hill," which gains about 3000 ft in six miles.  When I stopped at a rest stop at the top the engine was so hot I couldn't touch the dipstick.
The car ran like crap all the way back home.  Despite everything I could do it got much, much worse - backfiring and belching black smoke, finally wouldn't run at all.  So I bit the bullet and took it to our one-and-only aircooled VW shop in Kennewick.  I was informed, to dismay, that I had completely fried my engine.
The problem was with the thermostat, but it wasn't the thermostat's fault.  The longblock didn't come with the stud that the thermostat bracket attaches to, and the longblock wasn't even threaded for one.  My tap and die skills are very poor, and I did a lousy job.  As a result, the stud came loose and the thermostat pushed down instead of up, locking the cooling vanes closed.  Of course I was totally unaware of the situation, reveling in the fact that the Bug crested the top of the hill in 4th gear at 55 mph.
The mechanics at the shop completely rebuilt the engine (only the case was salvagable).  In the process the engine was upgraded to 1641cc, with new pistons and cylinders, dual-port heads, camshaft, bearings, the whole nine yards.
The easiest way to tell whether or not you have this overheating problem is to get yourself a candy thermometer (up to 400F) with a 6-inch long probe.  Then remove the dipstick and push the thermometer down into the hole.  If your oil temperature is above 230F, you're in trouble.  If the oil is hot, your next chore will be to figure out why.  For starters, check out our
Overheating
article.
Bottom line of this little debacle - with a new rebuilt German 427-1 carburetor, new drive belt, new chrome GT Sports muffler, and new tires and we were back on the road.  This has sure been an expensive hobby!
Below are pictures of the car both before and after the rebuild
                      process. A twelve-year process - my son purchased this car in 1997, and it's been a "thorn" in my side ever since!  (A love/hate relationship!)  For a description of the work we did, please take a look at
1973 SB Rebuild Process
. Click here for
Pictures
that document my experiences rebuilding this Super Beetle. (I'll be adding more pictures as time permits.)  The car doesn't LOOK much different, but believe me, bumper-to-bumper it's almost a completely different machine!
I'm now using the car as a daily driver, and it's an absolute
                    joy to drive -- and with the new engine it's just like new!
                    I love the Gene Berg shifter, the Scat steering wheel, and the "mellow" GT Sports muffler.  The brakes are absolutely solid now, with the new disc
                    brakes on the front.  Little problems (like a clogged fuel filter, turn signal cancellation, etc.) continue to crop up, just to keep me on my toes, but all in all we essentially have a new 1973 Super Beetle!
~~~
Dave's '73
                    Super Bug
Before Rebuild.
Rebuild
                    Complete.
~~~
We Have Met the Enemy and He Is Us!
(At least that's the way it feels sometimes!)
* * * * *
Design by
Erin