Accelerator Cable Replacement
Accelerator Cable Replacement
Click on this link for further discussion of the
Accelerator 
                  Cable
and related topics.
~~~
This 
                procedure was updated after another broken cable
experience on August 12/13, 2004, and again after a
cable upgrade in November 2007.
~~~
Note:
The accelerator cable connects the carburetor (throttle 
              lever) with the accelerator pedal.
The routing of the cable from the accelerator pedal rearward is as 
                follows -
From 
                its attachment to the accelerator pedal in the cabin, the cable 
                passes rearward through a metal tube in the floor pan.
The cable immerges into the area over the transaxle and enters 
                a flexible guide tube, through which it runs rearward to the firewall.
The 
                guide tube has a flared metal fitting on the rearward end. This 
                fitting fits over a metal tube that projects into the engine compartment 
                and goes through the fan shroud.
Note:
The flexible guide tube containing the accelerator 
                cable runs over the top of the transaxle, inboard of the clutch 
                cable. Working with the flexible guide tube and fitting its flared 
                end over the metal tube projecting forward through the firewall 
                is VERY awkward. The left rear wheel must be removed, and light 
                is essential - and only one arm at a time can be reached into that 
                area. It feels SO good when you finally get it! :-)
The 
                accelerator cable passes through the guide tube and through the 
                metal tube running through the fan shroud, rearward to the carburetor, 
                where the barrel clamp (cylindrical metal fitting - see picture below) on the end 
                of the cable attaches to the bottom of the throttle lever.
~~~
Removing the Accelerator 
                  Cable
The 
                following procedure for removal replacement of the accelerator cable was 
                adapted from procedures you will find in the various manuals, 
                augmented by our own experience.
Remove 
                    the air cleaner.
Detach the cable from the carburetor by loosening the screw in the 
                    barrel clamp in the throttle lever near the base of the carburetor.
Barrel Clamp
~~~
Note:
The barrel clamp must be prevented from turning 
                while you loosen the it in. We've had best success with a small vice grip pinching the cable against the bottom of the throttle lever so it can't move while the bolt in the barrel clamp is tightened or loosened.
Remove the cable from the barrel clamp and, if the cable is broken, pull it rearward completely out of the car. Put the barrel clamp aside in a safe place -- you won't be able to reattach the cable if you lose it.
Detach the front cable end from the accelerator pedal.
Block the front wheels. Raise the rear of the car and support it 
                    securely on jackstands.
Remove the left rear road wheel for ease of access.
Note:
This job is very awkward at best -- it is virtually impossible if the left rear wheel 
                    is not removed.
If the cable is still in the car at this point, reach in from 
                    the left side of the car over the top of the transaxle. You 
                    will find several hoses/cables in this area -- the fuel line, 
                    the clutch cable, and the tube containing the accelerator 
                    cable. The latter, which we will refer to as the "flexible 
                    guide tube," is just about right in the middle, inboard of 
                    the clutch cable.
Pull the flexible guide tube forward, which will pull the flared 
                    fitting away from the tube that runs through the fan shroud 
                    and will pull the cable forward through the firewall. Leave 
                    the guide tube dangling, with the cable protruding from the 
                    rear end of it.
Move to the front of the car and pull the broken forward end of 
                    the cable out of the tube near the accelerator pedal. Wipe 
                    it with a cloth as it is coming out to prevent grease from 
                    getting on the floor covering.
~~~
Accelerator 
                  Cable Installation
First 
              of all, make absolutely sure that your cable is the proper length. 
              Thanks to
Aircooled.Net
for the following information -
'75 - '79 Beetle and Super - 2608mm
'72 - '74 Beetle, Super, Ghia and Thing - 2650mm
'66 - '71 Beetle, Super and Ghia - 2627mm
'58 - '66 Beetle and Ghia - 2650mm
'46 - '57 Beetle and Giha - 2650mm
~~~
Start the new cable into the tube just to the rear and slightly 
                inboard of the accelerator pedal. Make sure to have a few rags 
                handy, then lubricate the cable with grease as you push it into 
                the tube (grease your fingers and slide the tube between your 
                fingers as you push it in to the tube).
Push the cable rearward as far as you can get it, greasing it 
                all the way along as you go. Hopefully when you go back to the 
                left rear of the car you will find the rear end of the cable dangling 
                from the rearward end of the flexible guide tube.
Note:
If you have removed the flexible guide tube for any reason, at 
                this point you will have to push the cable rearward through the 
                rubber boot and flexible guide tube, then slip the rubber boot 
                and forward end of the guide tube into place. Make sure the cable 
                protrudes from the rear end of the guide tube.
Push the metal tube that runs through the fan shroud into position, 
                making sure that it properly exits the shroud in front (front 
                is front). Then make sure that the tube extends through the hole 
                in the firewall. You will be able to see it right about the top 
                rear of the transmission, protruding through the rubber seal.
Note:
It is difficult to see the end of the tube protruding though the 
                firewall -- there's so much stuff in the way (and if you wear 
                bifocals like I do!). It will be above and inboard of the clutch 
                cable. Also, the rubber over the top of the transaxle (especially 
                if it is new) may be in the way and prevent the tube from protruding 
                through. If this is the case, you will have to cut a notch in 
                the rubber with a sharp knife to allow the tube through (easier 
                said than done!).
Guide the accelerator cable into the tube that is protruding 
                through the firewall. Then flex the guide tube forward and place 
                the flared fitting on the end of it over the tube that is projecting 
                through the firewall.
Note:
This is quite difficult, considering that the tube through the 
                fan housing is free to move forward-to-back. If you don't have 
                an assistant to hold this tube in place, fashion a piece of wood 
                to place between it and something else in the engine compartment 
                to keep the tube from moving rearward while you install the flared 
                fitting on the end of the flexible guide tube over the fan housing 
                tube. We placed a little block of wood between the end of the 
                tube, against the fan housing wall, pinned against the vacuum 
                nozzle on the intake manifold.
Working in the engine compartment, pull the cable through the 
                fan housing tube into the engine compartment.
Move once again to the cabin and reconnect the front fitting 
                on the cable to the accelerator pedal. There are two types of 
                fittings on the front end of the accelerator cable:
The stock S-shaped fitting, which is inserted through the 
                  hole in the pedal lever from the side toward the brake pedal.
Note:
If you hook up the S-shaped fitting the other 
                  way (i.e., inserted through the hole from the side opposite 
                  the brake pedal), it will come apart the first time you put 
                  your foot to the accelerator pedal.
Wrong way...
Right way.
~~~
Note:
There 
                is a significantly improved cable ("bulletproof") available from
Aircooled.Net
. 
                This cable incorporates a flat-paddle design for attachment to 
                the accelerator pedal (see the picture below). The paddle simply 
                bolts to the pedal connection(loosely), with nylon washers and 
                a Nyloc nut - tight without being tight).
BugPack Cable 
                  Connection
~~~
Using 
                the barrel clamp, loosely connect the accelerator cable to the 
                bottom of the throttle lever(see the picture below).
Note:
The only drawback we see to the stouter "bulletproof" cable is its lack of a solid metal end connector as on the stock cable.  Without this, the barrel clamp screws down directly onto the cable, creating a tendency for it to become mangled over time, especially if the carburetor is repeatedly removed.  This problem can be overcome through the use of a throttle cable extension kit available from Bugpack.
CAUTION:
Make absolutely sure that the barrel clamp rotates freely in its 
                two holes at the base of the throttle lever. If it doesn't, it 
                will hang up and cause the accelerator lever to stick, usually 
                at a high rpm. You may be tempted to tap it into place with a 
                hammer, but don't do it! If it's that tight, it won't rotate as 
                the accelerator cable is pulled back and forth, and it will stick. 
                Take the barrel clamp out and polish it with emery cloth until 
                it rotates freely in the holes as the base of the throttle lever.
Have an assistant fully depress the accelerator pedal (or use 
                a couple of heavy bricks to do it) while you adjust the cable. 
                With the pedal fully depressed and the cable extended forward, 
                the throttle lever should be wide open and attached to the cable 
                such that there is about 1mm of clearance between the throttle 
                lever and the point where it impinges on the body of the carburetor. 
                Again, we found a small vice grip necessary to hold the barrel 
                clamp and cable in place while tightening the bolt in the barrel 
                clamp.
Note:
The 
                throttle arm should move almost 90 degrees from closed to fully 
                open - when closed it sits almost (not quite) horizontal across 
                the carburetor throat and when fully open it stands vertically 
                in the throat. So if you're getting more movement by pulling on 
                the throttle arm (than the accelerator pedal provides) then the 
                cable is not properly adjusted.
Note:
The Bugpack cable is very long and must be cut to length. Making 
                sure the choke is open, cut the cable, leaving about one-ince 
                extra after the barrel clamp. It is recommended that the cable 
                end be soldered to prevent the cable from unraveling.
Dave uses a throttle cable extender, which attaches to the cable and then goes through the barrel clamp.  The screw in the barrel clamp tightens down on the cable extender instead of the cable.  Great look, too!
Throttle Cable Extender
Note:
Rob just pulls the accelerator cable back finger tight (NOT with 
                any kind of tool) and then secures it in place with the barrel 
                clamp, and it works just fine. Here are some details on how that's 
                done -
Remove 
                  the throttle arm spring to provide clearance.
Secure 
                  the idle screw on the top of the throttle arm to the lowest 
                  step on the cam (Dave uses a cable tie).
Pull 
                  the cable through the barrel clamp until it's tight (don't use 
                  a tool - your strong pull is all you need.
With 
                  the throttle lever in the idle position (against the lowest 
                  step on the cam), hold the cable tightly and tighten the barrel 
                  clamp screw securely with an 8mm socket.
Replace 
                  the throttle arm spring.
Way 
                  easy!
Properly Connected 
                  Accelerated Cable
~~~
Reinstall the air cleaner and all of its various hoses.
Test drive the car to make sure the accelerator cable is functioning 
                properly.
Now you may find it necessary to re-tune the carburetor, particularly 
                the idle speed. (See our
idle
procedure). And with the idle speed adjusted correctly, it may 
                be necessary to adjust the
timing
.
* * * * *
Design by
Erin