Accelerator Cable
Accelerator Cable 
                    Discussion
~~~
Subtopics 
                  covered in this article -
Accelerator 
                    Cable Replacement/Adjustment Procedure
Accelerator 
                    Cable Experience Discussion
Accelerator 
                    Cable Adjustment Discussion
Experience: 
                    Accelerator Cable Guide Tube
Experience: 
                    Barrel Clamp
~~~
The 
                  accelerator cable is routed from the accelerator pedal through 
                  the floor pan, then into a flexible guide tube near the transaxle, 
                  and finally through a tube in the fan housing to the carburetor, 
                  where it attaches to a lever arm that in turn attaches to the 
                  throttle valve inside the carburetor. In the top of the lever 
                  arm there is a screw that rests on a stepped cam. This cam is 
                  attached to the upper butterfly valve in the carburetor, the 
                  choke, which we will discuss later.
~~~
Experience: 
                  Accelerator Cable Replacement
Dave found that one of the reasons his car was 
                  not idling as is should was that the accelerator cable connection 
                  under the accelerator pedal was not attached correctly. "A very 
                  poor design," he thought at first. He bent the metal piece of 
                  the end of the cable around so that it could not come loose 
                  or get twisted around improperly. Then he was able to adjust 
                  the cable properly at the carburetor end.
Some 
                  time later Dave's accelerator broke while he was driving home 
                  from work, right behind the metal fitting that he had previously 
                  bent around to make it fit properly. Dave then examined the 
                  fitting on the new cable properly and had a learning experience! 
                  :-) The proper attachment of the fitting on the forward end 
                  of the accelerator cable is shown in the following picture -
Correct Attachment of the 
                    Accelerator Cable
~~~
While 
                  poking around behind the fan shroud from the left side, Dave 
                  found the copper guide tube coming through the fan shroud but 
                  NOT going through the hole in the firewall. So he jockeyed it 
                  into position and I had his son hold it in place while he pulled 
                  the old cable out from the front. Dave discovered that was was 
                  frayed down to two strands about two inches from the front end.
While 
                  his son held the copper guide tube in place, Dave started snaking 
                  the new cable towards the back, greasing it as he went. It got 
                  right to the hole in the firewall and hung up. So Dave crawled 
                  under the car and jerked the flexible tube out (he wasn't going 
                  to replace it, but when he found the fitting on the rear end 
                  missing he changed his mind). Getting the cable into the tube 
                  and the tube in place was fiddly, Dave found but not so much 
                  so as guiding the end of the cable out of the flexible tube, 
                  through the hole in the firewall, and into the copper tube that 
                  goes through the fan shroud.
During 
                  this process Dave found that something was interfering with 
                  the accelerator tube just forward of the firewall. He crammed 
                  a piece of stiff wire through while his son was watching from 
                  underneath -- he found the interference to be the new tranny 
                  rubber he had installed. So Dave cut a little notch in the rubber 
                  to accommodate the cable and reinstalled the cable with no problems.
Then 
                  came adjustment time. First Dave adjusted the cable exactly 
                  according to the specification -- accelerator pedal all the 
                  way to the floor, throttle lever wide open, 1mm clearance between 
                  the lever and the carburetor body. No problem -- except adjusted 
                  that way the throttle lever wouldn't return all the way to the 
                  cam and the throttle valve inside the carburetor was open too 
                  much -- thus high idle, just like before when the throttle valve 
                  was sticking. Dave decided that wouldn't do and readjusted the 
                  accelerator cable as Rob suggested -- throttle lever against 
                  the cam, cable pulled back as tightly as possible (finger tight). 
                  With it adjusted that way Dave was able to proceed with the 
                  fine tuning.
Dave 
                  expressed concern about the interface point between the rear 
                  end of the flexible tube and the copper guide tube as it pokes 
                  forward through the firewall. The fitting on the end of the 
                  flexible tube is flared, and the two just rest together, or 
                  so it would appear. Manipulating that interface is all by greasy 
                  feel, with your arm bent around at a very awkward angle. It's 
                  almost impossible to see it -- it's right on top of the tranny 
                  a couple of inches above and toward the center from the clutch 
                  adjustment nut. The copper guide tube wiggles around in the 
                  fan shroud and comes out of the hole in the firewall very easily. 
                  The rubber screw-in grommet type thing on the rear as it comes 
                  out of the fan shroud is deteriorated and not doing much to 
                  hold the tube in place.
Rob 
                  responded - So which way did the cable move when you tried it 
                  my 'quick' way? Did it project further to the rear of the car, 
                  or less? If too much further to the rear of the car (more cable 
                  through the fixing nut on the accelerator arm) it might result 
                  in overstretch of the cable on full throttle, and would be pulling 
                  hard on the accelerator arm. If less cable now pokes through 
                  the fixing nut, it means that at full pedal movement you'll 
                  have a 'not quite' vertical throttle butterfly maybe lose a 
                  few revs at the top end.
Dave's 
                  response to Rob - The accelerator cable was further "in" when 
                  adjusted your way. The other way it was further "out" and the 
                  idle screw (which I knew to be set correctly) would not return 
                  to the lowest step on the cam. So setting it your way works 
                  much better. Haven't noticed the loss of a few rev's at the 
                  top end.
If 
                  you see in any of your catalogs one of those screwy little rubber 
                  grommets that goes on the rear end of the copper guide tube, 
                  between it and the fan shroud, please let me know. That would 
                  hold the tube properly in the hole in the firewall.
~~~
Experience: 
                  Accelerator Cable Adjustment
Dave posed the 
                  following question to the RAMVA Newsgroup - My car is a '73 
                  Super Beetle. My question has to do with the accelerator pedal 
                  and cable. If the throttle lever is adjusted per spec, the cable 
                  sticks out way further (towards the back) than it should (the 
                  hold down bolt is actually on the cable). The accelerator pedal 
                  has very little travel, and when I pull it back I find that 
                  the arm with the wheel on it (accelerator cable attached) wiggles 
                  about an inch back and forth (front to back). Intuition tells 
                  me that this arm (Bentley calls it a "connecting lever") should 
                  be held completely back (no pressure on the pedal) by a spring 
                  or something and should only move forward when the pedal is 
                  depressed. I guess the throttle lever return spring should do 
                  this, but in mine there is about an inch of free play.
The 
                  bottom line is I can't adjust the cable properly, the throttle 
                  lever will not return completely to the cam, and thus I can't 
                  adjust the throttle screw or the idle. And the car runs like, 
                  well, dog do do.
Responses 
                  -
Check 
                    and see if you have the correct cable installed first. Or, 
                    the cable may be old and possibly.
Couple 
                    of thoughts -- Look under the pedal pedal for dirt/fluff etc. 
                    which might be catching the cable or pedal at that end. Sometimes 
                    some dirt gets caught under the bottom end ('floor' end) of 
                    the rubber cover on the accelerator pedal, which rubs on the 
                    floor (on mine anyway). Dirt under here tends to push the 
                    accelerator on. A squirt of WD40 etc on the shaft/bushing 
                    and little roller (I presume you have one) under the pedal 
                    helps to keep it loose too. Have you made sure the cable is 
                    not pulled too tight? I set mine by loosening the lock nut 
                    on the carby end, and while holding the throttle arm against 
                    the lowest step on the cam, just tugging the cable rearwards 
                    with fingers only (not pliers/multigrips) until it's snug 
                    -- but not tight through the throttle arm connector. This 
                    means there should be little on no play in the accelerator 
                    pedal, but not so tight that the throttle is held open on 
                    idle.
The 
                    cable end at the carburetor should fasten on the steel end 
                    piece, not on the cable itself. Could it be stretched, or 
                    even frayed cable (inside the cable tube)? Could it be hooked 
                    on wrong at the pedal end?
Dave's 
                  experience - This afternoon I took my 8mm box end wrench out 
                  to the car, parked at the curb in front of the house. I opened 
                  the engine lid and applied the wrench to the bolt that holds 
                  the accelerator cable into the throttle lever assembly. Then 
                  I loosened it up, held the throttle lever against the lowest 
                  part of the cam, and gave a pull on the accelerator cable. I 
                  found a problem -- the metal thing on the end of the cable pulled 
                  about 1/4-inch past the hold down bolt. I think we've got a 
                  stretched cable -- next on the shopping list. I tightened the 
                  bolt down on the wire -- not the best thing to do, but it will 
                  HAVE to do until I can get the cable replaced. I understand 
                  that's quite a chore.
Anyway, 
                  I went in and washed my hands and then fired her up. There is 
                  lots more pedal, and a MARKED improvement in the way it runs. 
                  Still hesitates a little on acceleration, but orders of magnitude 
                  better than the way is was running this morning. Now I need 
                  to check to see if the throttle lever is returning properly.
Question 
                  - My concern is that there is very little "travel" in the accelerator 
                  pedal -- the distance between no applied pressure and floor-boarded 
                  is very short. I think I need to get a buddy to help me with 
                  this, and I need to get in there under the steering wheel and 
                  take a look at what's going on. Something is definitely not 
                  as it should be. I like to be able to "feel" the accelerator 
                  pedal.
Rob 
                  responded - Hmmm... Sounds a little odd. When you floor the 
                  accelerator pedal lever does the throttle arm move all the way? 
                  (Put a brick on the accelerator pedal to hold it down if you 
                  haven't got a second person to look). You might need to remove 
                  the throttle spring if you can't find a big enough brick to 
                  hold the throttle down.
Maybe 
                  the cable has become partially unhooked or somesuch. It definitely 
                  sounds out of whack.
Dave's 
                  experience - I pulled the cable back pretty hard with my channel 
                  locks before tightening the bolt that holds it in place -- I've 
                  probably snugged it up too tight. You said to just pull it back 
                  finger tight, as I recall.
Rob 
                  responded - It certainly shouldn't need a hard tug -- it should 
                  slip both ways through the cable channel quite easily.
Experience 
                  continued - The only hard thing about taking the carburetor 
                  off is getting that blasted accelerator cable adjusted properly. 
                  I'm never sure that I've got it right. Your method (hold it 
                  finger tight and tighten it down) seems to work best, but there's 
                  still no gap between the arm and the stop as there is supposed 
                  to be.
Rob 
                  responded - Then if you floor it hard, you'd be putting strain 
                  on the throttle arm. I guess you'll just have to loosen it a 
                  bit until you get a bit of free play.
Experience 
                  continued - I can't loosen it too much -- there's only about 
                  1/8th inch of the end of the cable sticking out beyond the connection 
                  on the bottom of the throttle arm. I am going to loosen it just 
                  a tad more, though.
Rob 
                  responded - That seems a little odd too -- mine pokes through 
                  the clamp about 1/2 way, so there's plenty of adjustment either 
                  way.
~~~
Experience: 
                  Fan Housing Guide Tube
Dave's experience - Regarding the tube that passes through the 
                  fan housing -- this tube just sits 
                  loose in the fan housing at a slight downwards angle (rear up, 
                  front down), and has a flange on the rear side which stops it 
                  falling into the shroud. This tube allows a degree of engine 
                  rotation under acceleration, etc. without kinking/pulling the 
                  cable. The hole in the FRONT of the fan shroud is a bit enlarged 
                  to allow this movement.
It 
                  would be a devil of a job to thread the cable through the shroud 
                  without this metal sleeve, and it could then bind on the shroud 
                  edges too.
Question 
                  - Somebody told me a while back that I would have to get the 
                  guide tube welded back in place. How about if I position it 
                  properly and then put a bead of JB Weld around it to hold it 
                  firmly to the fan housing? I fear that our accelerator cable 
                  is going through the fan shroud bare and that it's rubbing against 
                  the metal edge and wearing, thus the lengthening that we seem 
                  to be experiencing.
Experience 
                  continued - Earlier I asked about the accelerator cable tube 
                  and thought maybe I should "JB Weld" it to the fan housing. 
                  With the carburetor off I had a better look, and of course you're 
                  right -- the hole it comes through is enlarged specifically 
                  so the tube can move. Ours has a rubber spiral type plug that 
                  surrounds the tube and is supposed to screw into the hole, except 
                  our plug is old and in very poor shape. I've never seen either 
                  the tube or the plug for sale anywhere -- have you? The tube 
                  is so loose that it's sticking out of the fan housing towards 
                  the back! Could it be that it's just pulled back part way out 
                  of the fan housing and maybe can be slipped back into place 
                  fairly easily?
Rob 
                  responded - The sheath has a close fitting hole in the rear 
                  of the shroud, and a slightly elongated hole in the front of 
                  the shroud. It should be possible to just 'fiddle' it into the 
                  front hole, so it slides forward and sits flush against the 
                  rear (carby side) of the shroud. The front hole is elongated 
                  slightly to allow the cable itself to align the sheath when 
                  it's pulled (the throttle is worked). With the sheath too far 
                  to the rear, the cable could be rubbing on the front side of 
                  the shroud edge, especially as it now has the weight of the 
                  sheath (the bit inside the shroud) pulling it down.
If 
                  you welded (JB or metal) it in, it would lose it's capacity 
                  to self-align, which is happening all the time as the engine 
                  flexes (rotates) on it's mounts. So welding is not a good idea 
                  -- it would create a real rubbing area at the front edge of 
                  the sheath.
VW's 
                  ingenious design again.
I'm 
                  not sure if your sheath is different to mine, you have the doghouse 
                  cooler on the front of the shroud. But I suspect it's the same 
                  -- that the spot on the shroud where the cable comes through 
                  is probably 'flush', just to the right of the doghouse 'bulge'. 
                  If there is a difference, maybe you need a longer sheath? But 
                  I doubt it.
Experience 
                  continued - I was out fussing around the engine this afternoon, 
                  tightening bolts in the tin and just generally cleaning. I noticed 
                  something interesting -- the bell shaped fitting on the rear 
                  end of the accelerator cable tube isn't sticking through the 
                  front of that piece on the engine that sticks up (whaddya call 
                  it!?). It's just resting on the other side, dropped down a little 
                  by gravity. I tried to pull it through, but its too big around. 
                  This fitting must come off so you can slip it through the hole 
                  from the rear and then reattached it to the tube. If so, I've 
                  never seen a procedure that makes this clear. Can you help me 
                  with this?
Rob 
                  responded - I have a single tube-shaped piece with an expanded 
                  (your bell shaped?) end which slides through the shroud from 
                  the rear of the engine, and pokes through the front of the shroud. 
                  The hole in the front of the shroud is slightly elongated so 
                  when the cable is under tension, the tube can align itself straight 
                  along the cable. It's only the expanded end which prevents it 
                  falling through/into the shroud.
Experience 
                  continued - I'm a bit baffled by the accelerator cable guide 
                  tube. The cable is running through okay, but there is a definite 
                  mismatch at the firewall. And its so awkward trying to work 
                  back there. I'm going to reach in with my long channel locks 
                  and see if I can get a good grip on the guide tube and push 
                  it into the hole and mate it with the cable tube on the other 
                  side. It's hard because the guide tube moves so freely through 
                  the fan shroud. I think there's supposed to be a rubber grommet 
                  or something on the rear end of it that holds it in place; our's 
                  is missing (of course) and I've never seen anything like that 
                  in any of the catalogs.
Rob 
                  response - There's no grommet (and never was) on mine. The hole 
                  on the front side of the fan shroud is (on mine) slightly elongated 
                  so the cable can line up straight from gearbox end to carby 
                  end, with the tube being "supported" at that point (front of 
                  fan shroud) by the cable. Makes for a small waste of cooling 
                  air I guess, but there is definitely no grommet.
Experience 
                  continued - The guide tube goes through the fan shroud and then 
                  through the firewall, protruding about half an inch forward 
                  of the firewall. The bell-shaped end of the accelerator cable 
                  tube is supposed to slip over the protruding end of the guide 
                  tube, but I'm having a devil of a time getting it to do so without 
                  pushing the guide tube back through the firewall. I think I 
                  need an assistant to hold the guide tube firmly in place against 
                  the rear of the fan shroud whilst I reach up over the tranny 
                  and slip the bell-shaped end of the flexible tube over the other 
                  end of the guide tube (if that makes any sense at all! :-)
I'm 
                  going to detach the accelerator cable and pull it forward through 
                  the firewall, then I'm going to wrap several layers of black 
                  plastic electrical tape around the rear end of the guide tube 
                  and "screw" it into the hole in the fan shroud as tightly as 
                  I can.
Rob 
                  responded - That might work. Certainly worth a try, and easily 
                  reversible if it doesn't help.
~~~
Experience: 
                  Barrel Clamp
In January 2005 Dave replaced 
                  his Bocar 34PICT/3 carburetor with a Pierburg model. Just on 
                  accounta 'cuz, Dave also replaced the barrel clamp at the base 
                  of the accelerator throttle arm, the clamp that connects the 
                  accelerator cable to the throttle arm. Dave found that the fit 
                  was a little tight, so Dave got out his "persuader" and gently 
                  tapped the barrel clamp into the throttle lever. Mistake! The 
                  barrel clamp must turn freely in the throttle lever, otherwise 
                  it will kink the accelerator cable and cause the engine to run 
                  at very high rpm. Dave prized the barrel clamp out of the throttle 
                  lever and reverted to the old one, which is slightly smaller 
                  in diameter and turns freely. Dave made sure with a healthy 
                  squirt of WD40! :-)
Barrel Clamp
Also 
                    used to connect the heater cables
to the heater box lever 
                    arms.
* * * * 
                    *
Design by
Erin