Accelerator Pump
Accelerator Pump 
                    Discussion
~~~
The 
                  following subtopics are discussed in this article -
General 
                    Discussion Regarding the Accelerator Pump
Measure the "Squirt"
Adjusting 
                    the Accelerator Pump (34 PICT/3 Carburetor)
Interference 
                    Problem -- Alternator/Pump Linkage
~~~
General Discussion
(34 PICT/3 Carburetor)
To get an engine 
                  to accelerate smoothly, you need both an advance in the timing 
                  and an increase in fuel flow. The vacuum distributor senses 
                  when you open the throttle and provides the extra advance timing. 
                  It is the duty of the accelerator pump to provide the increase 
                  in fuel flow.
When 
                  you open the throttle, the airflow increases immediately but 
                  the fuel (being more dense than air) takes a moment to catch 
                  up with the increased airflow. This would result in a lean mixture 
                  for a few moments (the car would hesitate), so the carburetor 
                  has an accelerator pump built into the side of it which supplies 
                  a shot of fuel to ensure smooth acceleration. The accelerator 
                  pump connected by a linkage to the accelerator; when acceleration 
                  is required, the pump squirts a spray of fuel directly into 
                  the throat of the carburetor to momentarily increase the fuel-to-air 
                  concentration. You can see it operate if you pull the air cleaner 
                  off and look down the carburetor throat.
There 
                  is a small bent brass pipe right pointing right straight down 
                  the throat of the carburetor-- this it the delivery tube. Grab 
                  the throttle arm and pull it firmly (like you were pushing down 
                  on the accelerator). You should see a squirt of fuel from the 
                  delivery tube straight down the throat of the carburetor.
If 
                  you pull on the throttle arm very slowly you'll see that the 
                  accelerator pump does nothing -- no squirt. It's set that way 
                  because when you open the throttle slowly the fuel flow has 
                  time to keep up with the increasing airflow - no extra shot 
                  of fuel is necessary.
We 
                  want as little accelerator pump squirt as possible to remove 
                  the stumble from the engine. Too much gas will wash the oil 
                  off of the cylinder walls (wearing out the pistons and rings) 
                  and will reduce the miles per gallon. so be conservative in 
                  your adjustment of the accelerator pump.
~~~
Measure the "Squirt"
(34 PICT/3 Carburetor)
The 
                  34 PICT/3 carburetor has a bell-crank with an adjusting bolt 
                  on the right side of the carburetor (see the
Exploded 
                  Figure
in our
Carburetor Disassembly 
                  and Cleaning
procedure, as well as the picture below). The quantity of gasoline that is 
                  injected upon acceleration can be measured, as follows -
Remove 
                    the top off of the carburetor to provide access to the accelerator 
                    pump injector.
With 
                    the float bowl filled with fuel, attach a length of small 
                    tubing to the discharge end of the accelerator pump injector 
                    so that the expelled gasoline can be caught and measured in 
                    a 25-ml graduated cylinder.
Note:
Maybe you can get 
                    the tubing on the end of the injector without removing the 
                    top off of the carburetor -- I sure couldn't! Save yourself 
                    some grief -- it's only five little bolts.
Hold 
                    the graduate under the end of the tubing and operate the throttle 
                    valve rapidly exactly ten times.
Measure 
                    the amount of gasoline caught and divide by ten to get the 
                    average quantity of a single injection pulse. The average 
                    quantity should be 1.45 to 1.75 ml for the 34-PICT/3 carburetor.
~~~
Rob suggests another method that might be easier -
To measure the accelerator pump squirt, it's easiest to just take the carburetor completely off, being careful to no spill fuel out of the carburetor bowl.  Put a container (e.g., a glass jar etc.) under the carburetor throat, then pull the throttle arm smartly - you should get 1.4-1.6cc (ml).  If you operate the arm say five times you can then measure the 7-8ml easy enough.  Divide the volume you obtain by the number of times you operated the throttle arm.  Don't operate the arm much more than five times, as the fuel level in the bowl will be diminishing each time you pull the throttle arm - eventually you'll run out of fuel in the float bowl.
~~~
Adjust the Injection Quantity
(34 PICT/3 Carburetor)
Loosen 
                  the retaining bolt on the adjusting segment (on the accelerator 
                  pump mechanism, right side of the carburetor).
Turn 
                  the bell-shaped adjusting segment counterclockwise (so that the retaining bolt moves clockwise in the slot in the adjusting bell) to increase the injection quantity; turn the adjusting segment clockwise to 
                  decrease injection quantity.
Accelerator Pump Adjuster
~~~
Please note carefully:
It 
                  is the ADJUSTING SEGMENT that you turn counterclockwise to increase the injection 
                  quantity, NOT the retaining bolt. If you do it backwards, 
                  you'll have a terrible "stumbling on acceleration" problem. 
                  (Once again, "Voice of Experience!")
Tighten the retaining bolt 
                  and recheck the injection quantity.
Note:
To compensate for the 
		    flat spot inherent in the 009 distributor (but ONLY this distributor), adjust the accelerator 
                    pump injection quantity to the maximum; i.e., move the adjusting 
                    segment counterclockwise as far as it will go.
Accelerator pumps on other carburettors
On the H30/31, the accelerator pump linkage has a spring around the actuating arm, pushing on the pump lever, 
		with a plastic nut on the end of the arm.  Tightening that plastic nut will push 
		the pump lever up the actuating arm, compressing the spring, so the pump will work 
		sooner when the throttle arm starts to move - increasing fuel delivery. Be careful though, compressing the 
		spring too much will result in a restriction of full movement in the main throttle arm - you might not get full throttle.
On the 30PICT/1 and /2, the accelerator pump linkage has a spring around the actuating arm, 
		pushing against the pump lever. The spring is compressed by removing the small split pin, 
		compressing the spring, and inserting the split pin another hole in the operating arm.  Compressing the spring more 
		makes the accelerator pump work sooner when the throttle arms starts to move - increasing fuel delivery. Be careful
		though, compressing the spring too much will result in a restriction of full movement in the main throttle arm - 
		you might not get full throttle.
~~~
Pump Linkage/Alternator Interference
See 
                      also our
Alternator 
                      Pump Interference
article.
On 
                    our 1971 1600dp engine, equipped with a 34PICT/3 carburetor 
                    and an
alternator
(1971 engines had generators), we 
                    found that the accelerator pump linkage was impinging on the 
                    alternator in two places -- the accelerator pump adjustment 
                    screw, and immediately forward of the accelerator pump itself. 
                    We couldn't see the latter interference readily because of 
                    the air cleaner and the automatic choke. This interference 
                    was preventing the idle screw from touching the choke cam 
                    like it's supposed to, thus making it impossible to properly 
                    tune the carburetor.
This 
                    interference was puzzling to us at first -- the intake manifold 
                    and heat riser assembly is all in one piece, and we thought 
                    surely that the alternator was designed to fit. This was before 
                    we realized that this assemblage of components was designed 
                    to work with a
generator
, not an alternator. The alternator 
                    is larger in diameter than the generator, especially at the 
                    rearward end.
Rob 
                    suggested that we raise the carburetor so that the accelerator 
                    pump linkage would clear the alternator. He wrote - It would 
                    be a very simple job for a workshop to make a spacer out of 
                    brass for you (to fit under the carburetor to raise it up). 
                    You'd just need to take one of the gaskets to them to use 
                    as a pattern, and decide how high it needs to be (1/2 inch 
                    or so?) Then use a gasket on both sides of the new spacer 
                    and you are in business. 2-3 gaskets under the carburetor 
                    might be enough, if you can't get a spacer.
I'm 
                    not sure about the bolt length on the carburetor though -- 
                    you might have to replace the studs with longer ones or use 
                    through-bolts. If they currently have a little spare thread 
                    under the nut, measure this length and determine whether this 
                    thickness spacer would give you enough lift. Even 1/4-inch 
                    might do it.
We 
                    finally solved the interference problem three ways -- we raised 
                    the carburetor a bit with three home-made gaskets, ground 
                    a bit off of the adjusting bell and nut, and ground just a 
                    titch off of the alternator body with a Dremel.
* 
                      * * * *
Design by
Erin