Fuel Additives
Fuel Additives
~~~
Additives 
                    discussed in this article include -
Tetraethyl 
                        Lead
Methyl 
                        Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE)
Ethanol
~~~
In 
                    the USA there is a lot of possible variations in fuel additives 
                    because lead has been replaced first with MTBE and later with ethanol (alcohol), but this is not 
                    true everywhere. Some history -
~~~
Tetraethyl 
                      Lead (TEL)
Tetraethyl 
                    lead (TEL), colorless, poisonous, oily liquid, Pb(C
2
H
5
)
4
, 
                    was added to gasoline for internal-combustion engines as an 
                    antiknock agent. TEL needed ethylene dibromine and ethylene 
                    dicloride scavengers mixed in to prevent an excess of lead-oxide 
                    build up in the engines, and although the story revolved around 
                    lead - it was as much for the scavengers that lead was removed. 
                    BUT - along comes the MTBE (methyl tertiary butyl ether) alternative, 
                    and the need for higher proportions of aromatics (benzene 
                    etc). MTBE itself tends to increase the NO
x
levels 
                    in the exhaust (although it reduces carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons). 
                    It also results in a slight increase in fuel consumption since 11% 
                    MTBE results in 2% used oxygen in the fuel, meaning that there is slightly less enegry 
		   in each litre/gallon of fuel.
In 
                    the final days of lead in the late 80s they were adding only 
                    0.2 gm/litre (down from 1.05 gm/litre - the practical limit 
                    was 1.1 gm/litre), and this reduced the halogen scavengers 
                    too, so the last leaded fuels were not nearly as nasty as 
                    they had been 20 years previously.
LRP 
                    (lead replacement petrol), which contains MMT (methylcyclopentadienyl 
                    manganese tricarbonyl) has been used in aome countries, including Australia, but 
		    has proven to be a poor substitute 
                    -  it causes spark plug fouling with resultant 
                    hard starting and rough running. It is not popular, and lots 
                    of folks with older cars which needed lead are using unleaded 
                    with additives instead (some of which contain MMT so go figure!)
According 
                    to the lengthy FAQ on fuel I have, there is some variation 
                    in the US brands due to the no-lead rules and the resulting 
                    substitutes for higher octane fuels. (I don't know if different 
                    'cheaper' brands or "name" brands would be better.)
The 
                    FAQ I have indicates it's usually better to stay away from 
                    additives, apart from a bit of upper cylinder lubrication. 
                    Most of these are just kerosine-based anyway, so I wouldn't 
                    bother. The VW engine doesn't need extra upper cylinder lubrication 
                    because the valves don't have valve seals (they slope down 
                    at the spring end so excess oil runs away from the cylinders), 
                    and since they don't use valves seals they get plenty of lubrication 
                    from the oil on the tappet end -- it works it's way up the 
                    valve stems by capilliary action. The cylinders get plenty 
                    of oil too, so it's not needed for the rings etc.
In 
                    the United States lead additives have been completely banned, 
                    and compounds such as Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE), and more recently Ethanol, are 
                    added to raise octane rating and promote cleaner combustion.
~~~
Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether 
                      (MTBE)
MTBE (Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether) 
                    is an oxygenate that was introduced as a gasoline additive 
                    in the US in the 1980s to replace TEL while remaining harmless to catalytic converters. 
		    The US fuel laws allowed up to 2% 
                    total oxygen in the fuel -- that's 11% MTBE. This varies a 
                    bit from State-to-State, and summer-to-winter. I don't think 
                    all states actually used it, and there are definitely different 
                    amounts in some areas where it IS used. Much of California 
                    had up to 11% MTBE, and Denver too, but areas outside Denver 
                    had a different fuel formulation (lower MTBE or no MTBE)-- 
                    some Denver folks filled up outside the city when they could because 
                    the car runs better.
Since MTBE is oxygenated, an 11% concentration makes carburetted cars 
                    run 2% lean.  The slight hesitation that many VW owners experience is almost 
                    certainly a lean burn condition for a number of reasons, one of which was MTBE. 
		   VWs like a fractionally rich mix, which is part of what killed 
                    them off in the US (higher emissions). It is very difficult 
                    to sufficiently control the emissions from an aircooled engine, because the 
		    engine temperature varies a lot with engine load, 
                    and they don't like lean burn conditions.
Cars with engine-management computers 
                    cope with MTBE by upping the fuel delivery for correct mixtures, 
                    but older carburetted cars can't adjust themselves on the 
                    move.
Hopefully a slight choke adjustment will help this, or you may increase the size of the main jet (say from X125 to X127.5 -- more than enough to compensate for 11% MTBE in the fuel).  So if your car is stuttering  on acceleration and running a little hot when cruising, increasing the main jet by one size might be the fix that is needed.
Just a change of the brand of fuel might help, too.  Some companies use more aromatics (which have natural high octane ratings) and less MTBE to 
                    get the right octane number. The 60 page FAQ and California 
                    EPA documents I have on it says there is enough variation 
                    in fuels in the US to make it worth experimenting with brands. 
                    They also say you should be prepared to change brands winter/summer 
                    if you do find an improvement, because the formulas change 
                    winter/summer.
California is requiring reduced 
                    aromatics because they also result in more pollutants, but 
                    this is a double whammy. You then need more MTBE or Tertiary Amyl Ether (TAME) or 
                    one of the other oxygenates to increase the octane number, 
                    and then you burn more fuel in the computerised cars, which 
                    increases total pollution anyway. Fascinating.
MTBE doesn't do anything for 
                    the valve seats. With vintage and classic cars the loss of 
                    lead is not a huge problem -- they do only small mileage, 
                    and valves seat damage usually only occurs when the valves 
                    are running really hot (engine working hard), so going for 
                    a car club cruise in your 1930 MG once a month is not usually 
                    a problem.
But for many of our cars on the 
                    road, being used every day, and still having cast iron heads, 
                    it's a REAL problem. They really do need the lead coating 
                    (or a substitute) on the exhaust valves to prevent a problem called Valve Seat Recession (VSR).
MTBE doesn't help there -- 
		    it's only an octane booster. In some countries Lead Replacement 
                    Petrol (LRP) is available which has lead subsitutes (MMT mentioned above) to protect 
                    the valve seats from valve seat recession, but fortunately 
                    for VW owners the VW engine has hardened steel valve seats 
                    in the aluminium heads so valve seat recession is not a problem. 
                    The VW engine does NOT need lead or lead substitutes in fuel. 
                    In fact if you have LRP additives in your country -- DON'T use it in 
                    the VW engine. The VW engine runs hotter than it's water-cooled 
                    cousins, and burning LRP in them tends to bake the LRP residues 
                    onto the spark plugs, causing rough running and hard starting.
MTBE is falling out of favor 
                    in the US -- it's being found everywhere in the environment, 
                    with what effect I don't know, as a result of leakage from 
                    service station sites and tanker spills, etc. It mixes readily 
                    with water, so it easily contaminates ground water and so 
                    on. And of course since it contains "used" oxygen there's 
                    less "fuel" in the fuel, so fuel consumption INCREASES, which 
                    increases the total exhaust emissions and so on. California 
                    has moved to ban the addition of MTBE by 2002.
Until recently we hadn't gone 
                    down the MTBE path in Australia, and I was in hopes that we 
                    wouldn't. However now (March 2003) Woolworths (a large supermarket 
                    chain in Australia which has an associated fuel outlet) began 
                    selling a fuel called Woolworths Petrol Plus. Their web site 
                    indicates that this petrol (imported into Australia, not refined 
                    in here) contains up to 7% MTBE, and an average of between 
                    2 and 3% MTBE -- but not in Western Australia or South Australia, 
                    where oxygenates are banned.
2-3% MTBE causes no problems 
                    for the VW engine, but 7% MTBE will run the engine about 1% 
                    lean, which might be noticable in some cars (hesitation, running 
                    hot). So if your Australian bug has a tank full of Petrol Plus 
                    and the engine feels a little sick, try switching to one of 
                    the other brands and see if that helps. If it does, then you'll 
                    now know WHY it helps, as no other brand in Australia uses 
                    MTBE laced petrol.
Folks in Australia are getting REALLY 
                    confused!
With MTBE or gone and the aromatics like methyl benzine 
                    (toluene) being reduced too (because it's carcenogenic), 
                    it's going to be hard to get the octane number high enough.
~~~
Ethanol
Ethyl 
                    alcohol (ethanol) is added to fuel in many places to reduce 
                    costs and to extend the life of our oil reserves. It also encourages clean burning of the gasoline,
		   and has a high natural octane number.
		    Ethanol is soluble in gasoline, and in some countries it's common 
                    enough to see 10% ethanol blends. In Australia for example, 
                    a common mix is E10 (10% ethanol), and E85 (85% Ethanol) is also available.
There has been lots of discussion about how the addition of 
                    ethanol helps the combustion process and how it will help farmers.  
		    In the USA the main source of Ethanol is from corn.  In Australia it's often made from
		    sugar grown in Queensland and northern New South Wales, where they make it from otherwise 
                    excess molasses.
However, 
                    no one has picked up the subject of older carburetted cars. 
                    The addition of ethanol to gasoline causes big problems in 
                    a VW engine, as ethanol makes the engine run 4% leaner.  To compensate for 10% ethanol in gasoline (E10),
		    you must increase the main jet by one or two steps (e.g., from X125 to X127.5 or 130) and possibly 
		   the idle jet by one step (from 55 to 60), although sometimes just adjusting the Volume Screw on the
		    carburettor will be enough to adjust the idle mixture.
Another 
                    consideration -- production of pure anhydrous ethanol is difficult 
                    and expensive, as it forms an azeotrope with water on distillation 
                    -- resulting in about 96% ethanol. This 4% or so of water will require 
                    an increase the jet sizes just a little to cope with the water 
                    (main jet maybe 185, and idle maybe 80-82 for an ethanol-only 
                    fuel).
Ethanol 
                    attracts water of course, so storage in a car's fuel tank 
                    in the open weather means it will absorb condensation, and 
                    you won't know it's happening until the engine starts to sputter.
Some 
                    VW enthusiasts wonder if they can run their 1500cc or 1600cc engines 
                    on ethanol. They envision the ability to produce ethanol on 
                    their own from substances that don't release hydrocarbons 
                    when burned (such as corn and other biomass). It's all part 
                    of a hope to have a bio-Bug, a totally enviro-friendly Bug.
It 
                    would be easy enough to run a VW engine on ethanol. The main 
                    thing is that using ethanol would require fuel jets approximately 
                    200% bigger in cross section than gasoline needs, because 
                    ethanol contains a lot of "used" oxygen which is no longer 
                    available as fuel.
So 
                    if you have a 34PICT/3 carburetor with size 55 idle and 127.5 main jets, 
                    you'd need to increase those jet sizes to about 78 idle, and 
                    the main jet to about 180.
For information, the sizes indicate 
                    the hole size in mm, so 127.5 jet has a hole size of 1.275mm. So 
                    a hole size of 1.8mm has about twice the cross section of 
                    a hole size of 1.275mm - hope that makes sense.
I really don't 
                    know what size you'd need the air correction jet though - 
                    whether larger (for leaner at high speed) or smaller (for 
                    richer at high speeds) I don't know. I'd GUESS smaller (for 
                    richer, since you need MORE fuel with the ethanol), but that's 
                    only a guess. So it if the air correction is normally about 
                    an 80, you could try a 60 or something like that.
I 
                    think the engine itself would cope okay, so long as you weren't 
                    asking for bags more power - just what the standard cam etc 
                    gives you.
The 
                    engine would tend to run much cooler than running on gasoline, 
                    since it has a much higher latent heat of vapourisation (it 
                    cools a lot as it evapourates). So a cylinder head temperature 
                    guage might be useful (before the change too, to get an idea 
                    of normal temperatures) so you could perhaps partly block 
                    the fan intake (a circular piece of metal with a hole in the 
                    middle would be the way to do it) to keep the operating temperatures 
                    near normal - otherwise the wear rate on your cylinders and 
                    pistons would accelerate.
Ethanol 
                    is about 115 octane (using the US AKI measurement) so you 
                    could increase the compression ratio to about 10:1 to make 
                    use of it. That's a lower compression than burning ethanol 
                    in a water-cooled car because the VW runs hotter and so must 
                    use a lower compression for the same octane rating. For that 
                    sort of compression you'd have to make sure your engine had 
                    case savers, and it would be wise to use the 10mm head studs 
                    with 14mm case savers, rather than the 8mm studs and 12mm 
                    case savers. The larger case savers will give more protection 
                    from studs pulling out with the higher combustion pressures 
                    (if you increase the compression).
If 
                    you did increase the compression, you should normally reduce 
                    your amount of ignition advance a little, but the higher octane 
                    number of ethanol would indicate more advance, so you may 
                    have to play about with that one.
* * * 
                      * *
Design by
Erin