Brake Pedal Free Play Adjustment
Brake 
                        Pedal Free Play
Adjustment Procedure
This is one of our many "school of hard knocks" experiences!
See also our discussion of
Brake 
                      System Pressurization
.
The 
                      brake pedal must have about 1/4 inch (5-7 mm) of free play, 
                      measured at the top of the pedal
.
~~~
Some Background
Brake 
                      pedal freeplay is the amount of pedal movement before the 
                      pushrod touches the piston inside the master cylinder, before 
                      the piston starts to move. It's quite a distinctive feel 
                      on the brake pedal, but you have to use your hand to feel 
                      it properly.
The 
                      brake pedal free play adjustment is very important. The 
                      5-7 mm of free play at the top of the brake pedal translates 
                      into 1 mm of play between the end of the push rod and the 
                      piston in the master cylinder. This distance is critical 
                      to assure that after braking the piston comes back far enough 
                      that it does not block the transfer port to the reservoir, 
                      allowing the pressure built up during braking to return 
                      to the reservoir and relax the system.
This 
                      brake pedal freeplay is very light and shouldn't be confused 
                      with the "take up distance" that the piston inside the master 
                      cylinder bore has to move before your brake lining engages 
                      with the drums/rotors; that is, the distance the pedal travels 
                      before braking action actually occurs. Excessive "take up 
                      distance" can be eliminated by bleeding air out of the lines 
                      and adjusting the brakes at each wheel. You usually have 
                      to readjust your brakes every oil change when new until 
                      they fully seat with the drums (sometimes even more often 
                      than that).
Note:
It took us a long time to figure this out -- lesson learned 
                    (the hardest of hard ways).
Bottom line:
VERY CAREFULLY 
                    set the free play (as measured at the top of the brake pedal) 
                    to between 5 - 7 mm by adjusting the length of the push rod. 
                    Be careful and take your time -- this adjustment is very critical. 
                    If it's not right, you can very easily ruin your brakes.
~~~
Free Play Adjustment Procedure
Note:
Unless you are VERY certain that the pushrod length has been tampered with, messing with the length of the pushrod is very risky and must be done with great care. VW recommends that the length of the push rod NOT be changed -- it must be a certain length (precisely 5.433" long plus or minus 0.019") and that's it.
To 
                        change the length of the push rod, first loosen the 15mm 
                        lock nut on the push rod (furthest rear) with an open-end 
                        wrench.
Carefully 
                        turn the 15mm nut on the push rod until it feels like 
                        its flush up against the piston in the master cylinder 
                        (no free play).
Turn 
                        the rod back about half a turn and check the free play 
                        at the top of the brake pedal.
Repeat 
                        until the free play, as measured at the top of the brake 
                        pedal, is EXACTLY within the range of 5-7 mm, then tighten 
                        the lock nut.
Not 
                      understanding what we were doing, we (that is, Dave) tried 
                      adjusting the free play by changing the length of the push 
                      rod, and we had a "school of hard knocks" pressurization 
                      experience as a result. If the transfer port to the reservoir 
                      is blocked, the braking pressure cannot be released, the 
                      brakes bind up, get hot, then the heat is transferred to 
                      the "trapped" fluid, thus pressurizing the system even more. 
                      This can bring your Bug to a complete stop, and heat up 
                      the brake drums to a point that you'll burn your fingers 
                      if you touch them. If you tow the car with this problem, 
                      you'll ruin the drums and shoes, as we did. :-( Once again, 
                      see our
Brake System Pressurization 
                      Article
for more discussion of this hard-learned lesson.
We 
                      received an interesting note about this from Sharkey's Garage 
                      -
I 
                      really wish an old VW engineer would explain to me why the 
                      master cylinder pushrod should be precisely 5.433" long 
                      (plus or minus 0.019"). If this measurement was *that* critical, 
                      why make the damn thing adjustable in the first place? A 
                      few others would agree with me, including a couple of actual 
                      certified and factory-trained ACVW technicians I know. The 
                      best response that one of them provided when somebody started 
                      going on and on about never adjusting the pushrod went as 
                      follows:
VW 
                      could not have foreseen that these cars would still be around 
                      decades after the factory manuals were printed. VW was very 
                      prideful of their products and the more you asked them "why", 
                      the more they tightened their sphincters and said "because". 
                      He gave plenty of reasons why adjustment of the pushrod 
                      may, in fact, may be required:
Loose 
                          tolerances (using OEM parts with crappy Mexican master 
                          cylinders);
Swapping 
                          single circuit master for newer dual circuit master;
Substituting 
                          pedal assemblies from cars with different years;
Worn 
                          or bent pedal stop;
Decades 
                          of wear on the pushrod tip and pin eyelet (which still 
                          has the crusty factory grease and has never been lubed 
                          since).
There 
                      has been debate in our correspondence regarding the adjustable 
                      stop on the floor behind the brake pedal with regard to 
                      brake pedal free play adjustment. The Haynes Manual says 
                      -
Reposition 
                      the brake pedal stop plate so that the brake pedal has 5 
                      - 7mm freeplay. This will produce the specified clearance 
                      between the pushrod and the piston recess.
Others 
                      say -
The 
                      mysterious sliding metal pedal stop in front of the pedals 
                      has nothing to do with the way the brakes operate. It is 
                      there to keep the brake pedal from returning too far back 
                      (toward the driver)...
The 
                      Bottom Line:
What is being affected here is the at-rest 
                      distance beween the master cylinder push rod and the piston 
                      inside the master cylinder. This distance must be 1mm, which 
                      translates to 5-7 mm of free play as measured at the top 
                      of the brake pedal. Don't drive the car unless the brake 
                      pedal free play is absolutely correct!
* 
                      * * * *
Design by
Erin