Air Inleakage
Air Inleakage
(See 
                        also our article on
Hesitation
.)
~~~
Topics 
                        covered in this article -
General Discussion
Testing for Air Inleakage
The Fix
Re-Bush Alternative
~~~
General Discussion
We'll lead in to this discussion of air 
				inleakage with a question from a reader -
I have a 1973 Type 1 with a 1600cc 
				dual port engine.  The distributor is an 009 centrifugal advance.  I replaced the left head because it 
				blew out a spark plug.  After replacing the head the engine would not idle, so I had the carburetor rebuilt.  
				It runs better but still will not idle correctly - it idles okay, then it speeds up by itself for about 
				30 seconds.  Then it idles down and stalls unless I tap the gas - then it recovers, idles high for 
				a moment and goes to low idle or stalls. I replaced the fuel pump, but no difference.
Rob responded - Your problem sounds like an air leak in the inlet manifold. 
				You have all the classic symptoms - poor/erratic idle, stalling, but runs when you use throttle 
				(the accelator pump gives it extra fuel).  Since you replaced the left head the most likely place is the joint 
				between the head and the twin port manifold end-piece.  It's sometimes hard to get these to sit exactly flat 
				before tightening them down.  Some folks find it easier to tighten the nuts there with the engine out of the 
				car, rather than struggling to get a wrench/spanner on to it whilst it's in the car...not enough room.  If you 
				need to do it with the engine in the car a wobble drive and socket usually works.
Other possible places are the inlet manifold rubber boot or boots (left and right) 
				and another common place is the throttle shaft - left side usually.
~~~
Leakage 
                    of air into the intake manifold can be an exasperating problem. 
                    This phenomenon occurs because the pressure inside the intake 
                    manifold is lower than atmospheric pressure. If there are 
                    any holes in the manifold or at any of the connection points, 
                    then air can be sucked into the manifold, causing the fuel-to-air 
                    mixture to become too lean. Air being sucked into the intake 
                    manifold can cause -
The 
                        car acts like it's not getting enough fuel; i.e., running 
                        too lean.
The 
                        car may run well at highway speeds, but the engine dies 
                        at idle and will only idle at higher than normal rpm (e.g., 
                        >1200 rpm).
Our 
                      experience:
At 1200 rpm the engine would start 
                      running rough, and below that it would die altogether. We 
                      had to set the idle at 1200 rpm or above just to keep the 
                      car running.
The 
                        engine hesitates and dies when you take your foot off 
                        the throttle, or hesitates when pulling out of corners 
                        at low rpm.
Difficulty 
                        in properly tuning the carburetor (actually tuning will 
                        be impossible).
Since 
                        the carburetor cannot be tuned correctly, the timing cannot 
                        be properly set.
You 
                        may get engine "looping" (alternating between high and 
                        low rpm).
The 
                        engine may backfire.
In 
                      this regard, Rob has written -- Backfiring in Beetles usually 
                      means running lean. On the overrun, it fails to burn properly 
                      so the exhaust system fills with unburned fuel mix, and 
                      then a successful spark and the hot exhaust gases sets the 
                      stuff in the muffler off with a bang.
Lots 
                        of frustration!
Air 
                        inleakage can occur at the following (certainly not all 
                        inclusive) -
At 
                          either or both ends of the carburetor throttle shaft 
                          (at the base of the carburetor);
Note:
A carburetor can wear a lot during a quarter century of 
                        use, and one of the major wear points is the throttle 
                        shaft bore hole(s) through the bottom of the carburetor. 
                        An out-of-round throttle shaft bore is often the source 
                        of air inleakage. A worn throttle shaft bore could present 
                        some of the symptoms listed above.
At 
                          the carburetor/intake manifold flange;
At 
                          the outer ends of the manifold where it attaches to 
                          the cylinder head;
At 
                          various points along the intake manifold (e.g., pinoles 
                          rubber connections in the dual-port manifold);
From 
                          simple oversight, like failure to prevent air from being 
                          sucked into the carburetor and/or the intake manifold 
                          by not plugging unused vacuum port(s).
Air 
                    inleakage shows up first in the idle. Inability to set the 
                    idle speed at the specified rpm indicates improper fuel/air 
                    mixture (too lean) or a fault in the ignition system -- usually 
                    the former.
Note:
It doesn't take much of a leak to affect the performance of the 34 series of carburetors.  They seem to be much more touchy than the smaller carburetors (Rob has an original 30PICT/2 with almost 300,000 miles on it and still working well).
~~~
Testing for 
                      Air Inleakage
There 
                    are a couple of good tests for air inleakage -
The 
                        first is the "blip" test. Rev the engine up to about 1500 
                        rpm, then pull the throttle lever back and immediately 
                        release it. If the engine promptly dies, or if it hesitates 
                        whenever the throttle is pulled back quickly, it is likely 
                        that you have air leaking into the intake manifold.
You 
                        can pin down the location of the air inleakage using the 
                        "starter spray" test. You can use ether-based starter 
                        spray (probably the best) WD40 or even LPGas from an unlit 
                        propane torch. The idea is to use something that is very 
                        volatile and very flammable that can be eaily sucked into 
                        the intake manifold at the leak point. With the engine 
                        idling (whatever it takes), alternately spray both ends 
                        of the carburetor throttle shaft, the carburetor/intake 
                        manifold flange, the outer ends of the manifold, and various 
                        points along the intake manifold. Listen for any increase 
                        in engine speed as the extra "fuel" is sucked into the 
                        system. (Alternatively, use a dwell-tachometer to see the 
                        momentary increase in engine speed.)
If 
                    you get ANY increase in engine speed during this process, 
                    you have an air leak, and you'll never be able to set the 
                    carburetor correctly until you get it corrected.
Note:
Dont use Carburettor cleaner for this test - 
			many of them do not contain any "fuel".
~~~
The 
                      Fix
If you have the carburetor off 
                    the car, look carefully for any excess sideways/up down movement 
                    in the throttle shaft i.e., is it a real sloppy fit in the 
                    carburetor? You should not be able to detect any lateral movement; 
                    if you do, it is likely that air is leaking into the system 
                    at this point, and all of your attempts to correctly set the 
                    fuel/air mixture will be in vain.
A test and temporary 
              fix: It pays to verify any problem before replacing/repairing the 
              part. To verify that there is air inleakage around the throttle 
              shaft, first remove the throttle arm, then clean the area around 
              the shaft with MEK, acetone or toluene.
When the area is clean and dry, 
              smear on THIN film of RTV compound (silicone) and allow it to cure. 
              Make sure the shaft is dry so the stuff will stick, but make sure 
              the edge of the leaking shaft hole is oiled so it WON'T stick to the shaft.
              Put a small fillet of sealant around the shaft - up against 
              the hole - before putting the the throttle arm back on. The idea 
              is to make a flexible sealing fillet around the shaft - a temporary 
              gasket - which would slide round the lip of the hole as the throttle 
              arm rotates the shaft.
Plan your moves ahead of time and wear disposable gloves--RTV 
                    is messy when smearing.
If this temporarily solves the problem it is good evidence you need to have new throttle shaft bushings installed (re-bush) or replace the carburetor.
A worn bushing where the shaft 
                    comes through the throttle body is not uncommon, and can be 
                    fixed by drilling out the hole and inserting a brass bushing (commonly called "re-bushing"). Re-bushing a throttle shaft bore isn't all that difficult, we're told. 
                    Solex provides kits for this (if you can find them). We've 
                    heard it said that the throttle shaft is the same diameter 
                    as a valve stem, so you can use a piece of valve guide as 
                    the bushing, but we have no first-hand experience with this.
If the throttle shaft is worn, it is likely that the carburetor is worn in other areas as well. An aftermarket replacement carburetor is the best fix for this problem.
Note:
See information regarding re-bushing and carburetor replacement below.
Note:
Don't forget, a new carburetor is not likely to work perfectly 
                    straight out of the box, particularly if it's a Brosol (Brazilian) 
                    model. From what others have said, it sounds like the Brosol 
                    carburetors need a careful cleaning and tightening up, and 
                    they might need the jets altered to suit your car, etc. Don't 
                    throw out the old carburetor until the new one is running 
                    right. Some parts off of the old carburetor might be useful.
The new Pierburg carburetors are said to be superior, in that they have more precise machining and so on. A while ago Dave purchased one and installed it on his '73 SB. The new carburetor has been working very well, but now, after just under three years of service, it appears to have become worn around the throttle shaft to the point that air is leaking into the intake manifold.
~~~
Re-Bush Alternative
The original throttle shaft bushings are "garlock" split style bushings made of relatively soft aluminum, which wears after a short while and permits air to leak in around the throttle shaft, essentially making the carburetor useless.
A cheaper alternative to buying a new carburetor is to have the carburetor rebushed.  Here's what a friend of Dave's who has done carburetor re-bushing has to say -
The problem can be cured by milling out the old aluminum bushings and inserting much better wearing brass bushings. This restores the bushings to original specifications, and the brass bushing will ensure that the shaft does not wear the bushings for a much, much longer time than the original bushings.
Here's a picture of Dave's worn out bushings -
Worn Out Throttle Shaft Bushings
* * * * *
Design by
Erin