Air Cleaner
Air Cleaner
This 
                      article, together with several pictures from Dave's '73 SB,
                      appeared in the April 2004 issue of "VW Trends" magazine.
~~~
Topics 
                    covered in this article include -
Introduction
Ancillary 
                      Air Cleaner Systems
Crankcase 
                      Ventilation
Evaporative 
                      Emission Control System
Intake 
                      Air Pre-Heating
"Pull 
                      Wire" Pre-Heat Control System
Vacuum-Controlled 
                      Pre-Heat System
Aftermarket 
                      Air Cleaners
~~~
Introduction
A 
                    component on the VW engine that is often taken for granted 
                    is the air cleaner. Sitting as it does on top of the carburetor, 
                    the big clunky stock air cleaner always seems to be in the 
                    way on tune-up day, and the average VeeDubber is tempted to 
                    change it out for one of those shiny chrome aftermarket models.
Through 
                    the 1972 model year the air cleaner was a large, round, dome-topped 
                    metal black thing with metal clips on it, possibly with several 
                    thin and fat hoses going to it. These round air cleaners, 
                    of which there are several different designs, have oil in 
                    them to clean the air before it goes into the carburetor and 
                    on into the engine. The oil is changed by removing the clips 
                    and the top of the air cleaner.
In 
                    1973 and later models, the air cleaner is a large black boxy shape with a paper
		    aircleaner inside. It serves the same purpose as 
                    the oil in earlier models -- to remove dust particles from 
                    the air before it is drawn into the carburetor for mixture 
                    with the fuel. The cleaning medium, whether it be oil or a 
                    paper filter, should be changed every 18,000 miles.
Earlier Model 
                      Oil Bath Air Cleaner
~~~
Later Model 
                      Paper-Element Air Cleaner
~~~
Ancillary Air 
                      Cleaner Systems
Cleaning 
                      the air for mixture with the fuel is the primary purpose 
                      of the air cleaner, but over the years a number of other 
                      important functions have come to be associated with it. 
                      In addition to the main air inlet port(s), there are other 
                      hoses attached to the air cleaner -- simple arrangements 
                      (or none) in early models, more complicated systems of hoses 
                      later on. These hoses are associated with the following 
                      ancillary air cleaner systems.
~~~
Crankcase 
                    Ventilation
In 
                    response to clean air requirements, VW put a rubber hose (about 
                    1/2" ID) from the oil filler pipe to the air cleaner to take 
                    the oil fumes from the crankcase to the carburetor for burning. 
                    The VW engine pulls fresh air into the crankcase from a spiral 
                    groove in the crankcase forward of (front is front) the engine 
                    crankcase pulley, thus providing positive crankcase ventilation.
This 
                    air, plus the "blow by" from the cylinders, is pulled into 
                    the air cleaner (and on to the carburetor to be re-burned) 
                    by way of the breather hose from the top of the oil filler tower. 
		    When the engine draws air through the air cleaner it creates a slight vacuum inside the 
                    air cleaner.
This 
                    negative pressure in the air cleaner, plus the positive pressure 
                    from the spiral groove pulling air into the crankcase, results 
                    in any oil fumes being drawn up into the air cleaner, through the carburettor,     
		   and burnt in the engine.
With 
                    little or no pressure drop at the top of the breather (e.g., 
                    because of substitution of the stock air cleaner with an aftermarket 
                    one), any extra pressure in the crankcase causes the oil mist 
                    to push out past the spiral groove and through the slots behind 
                    (actually, in front of) the pulley. This oil mist, of course, 
                    settles out inside the engine compartment and can make a real 
                    mess.
So 
                    -- for the crankcase ventilation system to work properly, 
                    it is essential that 1) a vacuum is established in the air 
                    cleaner, and 2) the hose between the oil filler and the air 
                    cleaner be in place so that crankcase gases are sucked up 
                    into the air cleaner and thence into the carburetor and intake 
                    manifold for burning.
~~~
Evaporative 
                    Emissions Control
On 
                    later models there is a rubber hose from a charcaol canister in the right wheel well, 
                    to the air cleaner. This hose provides suction on the evaporative 
                    emissions control system so that gases are directed to the 
                    carburetor for burning rather than escaping into the atmosphere.
Evaporated 
                    fuel, expelled from a full tank by expansion, is collected in 
                    the expansion chamber under the cowl panel in the luggage 
                    compartment. From there it escapes into a ventilation line 
                    that carries it to an activated charcoal canister located 
                    in the right rear wheel well. The activated charcoal absorbs 
                    the vapor, preventing it from entering the atmosphere.
When 
                    the engine is started, air from the engine's cooling fan, 
                    through a hose on the upper right side of the fan housing, 
                    is directed into the canister, blowing trapped fumes from 
                    the activated charcoal into the air cleaner. The filtered 
                    vapors are drawn through the carburetor and into the cylinders 
                    of the engine where they are burned.
Steel ventilation line from fuel tank.
Plastic tube from steel line to canister.
Exit hose to air cleaner.
Air hose from engine fan.
Photo courtesy of Bentley.
So 
                    for the evaporative emission control system to work properly, 
                    there is a nozzle on the upper right side of the fan shroud, 
                    through which air is blown to the into the activated charcoal 
                    canister, and another on the air cleaner into which air is 
                    returned to the carburetor.
On 
                    the 1973 and later air cleaners, there are two nozzles on 
                    the right end of the aircleaner. The furthest one forward 
                    has a baffle behind it inside the air cleaner; it is to this 
                    nozzle that the hose from the oil filler is directed to draw 
                    a vacuum on the crankcase. The other nozzle, furthest to the 
                    rear, is the one to which the hose from the activated charcoal 
                    canister is attached.
The Bentley Manual says "the activated charcoal filtering canister must be replaced after each 48,000 miles or two years, whichever comes first."  The canister replacement procedure is easy -
Label and then disconnect the vacuum hoses.  Remove the 
	mounting screws and separate the canister from the bracket.  
	Installation is the  reverse, making sure the routing of all of 
	the hoses is correct.
A 
                    note of caution:
If you have disabled the 
                    evaporative emission control system (as many people have), 
                    the outlet nozzle on the fan housing and the inlet nozzle 
                    on the air cleaner must be plugged. Otherwise valuable cooling 
                    air is lost, and the vacuum inside the air cleaner cannot 
                    be maintained.
~~~
Intake 
                    Air Pre-Heating
At 
                    some point, VW added an intake preheating system for faster 
                    cold-weather warm-up. The system initially consisted of a 
                    pull wire running from the thermostat to a movable flap inside 
                    the air cleaner intake. In 1973 and later models, this temperature-controlling 
                    flap is controlled by a vacuum system.
The 
                    intake air pre-heating system added yet another hose, at 2" 
                    the largest of the several hoses to the air cleaner. This 
                    hose, which is the same size as the fresh air hoses to the 
                    fan shroud, collects warm air from the #2 cylinder by way 
                    of an L-shaped tube underneath the engine tin. This warm air 
                    is then routed up to the air cleaner.
~~~
“Pull 
                    Wire” Pre-Heat Control
The 
                    carburetor pre-heat system on older model cars works like 
                    this:
The 
                    cooling control flaps inside the fan shroud are linked by 
                    a flat rod in the front (front is front of car) and outside 
                    of the fan shroud. The cooling flaps are worked by the brass 
                    bellows thermostat which is mounted under and between the 
                    right cylinders, inside the ducting for the used cooling air. 
                    The thermostat has a vertical rod extending from the top, 
                    running up between the two cylinders.
This 
                    rod connects to the cooling flap linkage, and also works the 
                    air intake pre-heat system by way of a pull wire (a black 
                    ‘sheathed’ single strand of piano wire) which starts on the 
                    back (back of car) of the fan shroud just under the generator/ 
                    alternator, and loops to the left and up behind the carburetor 
                    to the flap in the rectangular air cleaner intake pipe. Under 
                    this intake pipe is the 2" paper tube which pulls in warm 
                    air from the #2 cylinder by way of an “L-shaped” tube that 
                    protrudes up through the tinware.
There 
                    is an air-preheating regulator valve inside the air cleaner 
                    intake which normally closes off the pre-heater inlet. A lever 
                    on the side of the inlet connects the pull wire with the cooling 
                    flaps inside the fan shroud, and thus to the thermostat pushrod. 
                    If the pull wire is missing, you'll be sucking cold air into 
                    the carburetor all the time, instead of after the engine has 
                    warmed up.
When 
                    removing the air cleaner you can leave the pull wire attached 
                    and just rest the air cleaner at the back of the engine pulley 
                    (the cable is just long enough), or you can disconnect the 
                    wire to remove the cleaner completely. The regulating flap 
                    in the air cleaner is adjusted by sliding the sheath back 
                    or forwards through the clamp, so that the flap is open to 
                    the warm air pipe when the engine is cold.
~~~
Someone wrote - I have been 
		   reading your site looking for knowledge on my 1967 Beetle.  I have the original oil bath air cleaner 
		  with a neck on each side of it with a flap on each side.  I noticed the other day that they are 
		  clipped up to stay open.  There is a weight that hangs down on the outside of the neck that seems 
		  to hold it closed.  I was playing around with the engine idle and noticed that when I rev up the 
		  engine the weight moves.  I live in southern California in the city.  Should these flaps be clipped 
		  open all the time or should they be allowed to move with the engine revs?  Also what do they do?
Rob responded - The flap 
		  on the left side should be loose but weighted so it's normally closed, but will open when the engine 
		  is running hard and pulling in a lot of air.  The flap on the right side of the car should have a 
		  pull-wire (like a mower throttle cable) running to a crank on the flap unit inside the fan shroud on 
		  the right side of the engine (I bet it's not there!).
With this system, when the engine is cold 
		both air inlet flaps are shut and the carburetor air is pulled up from the right side cylinder head area 
		through the paper tube, so it gets warm air as soon as the engine starts to heat up.  As the engine gets 
		fully warmed, the thermostat opens the cooling flaps inside the fan shroud to increase the cooling 
		airflow, and this action also opens the right side air inlet flap so now the engine is running on cool 
		inlet air (the underside of the carburetor is now being heated by the heat riser under the manifold which 
		uses hot exhaust gas).  Now the engine is running on the right side air inlet until you floor the 
		throttle and then the weighted flap on the left side opens too.
That's used on the 67 and 68 years only.  
		For 69-71 they dropped the left side air inlet and increased the size of the right side inlet, so it 
		became all-or-nothing for warm/cold air through the single inlet with the pull-wire flap mechanism 
		(and from about 72 on they used a vacuum/temp switch device).
If the pull wire is missing, and the 
		cooling flaps inside the shroud will probably be missing too (should get them replaced as soon as 
		you can - they are quite important for fast and EVEN warmups), then the flap in the air inlet should 
		be fixed open.  It will mean the engine is a little rough when cold, but the engine only needs warm air 
		for the initial warmup period, then it should be running on cold air, with the heat riser under the 
		manifold providing the necessary heat to stop icing etc.
~~~
Vacuum-Controlled 
                    Pre-Heat Systems
In 
                    1972 VW changed to a vacuum-controlled intake pre-heating 
                    system for faster cold weather warm-up. A small vacuum line 
                    from a port in the intake manifold directly below the carburetor 
                    supplies vacuum via the tube, to 
                    the temperature sensor in the top of the oil bath cleaner (and from 73, to the 
		    bottom of the paper air cleaner). From 
                    there vacuum is carried by another small tube to the operating 
                    mechanism for the warm air intake, mounted on the air intake 
                    tube.
With 
                    the inlet air cold and the engine running, the air cleaner 
                    sensor feeds vacuum to the mechansim in the air inlet, 
                    which opens the regulating valve allowing warm air from the 
                    cylinder heads, by way of the paper intake, into the air cleaner 
                    and carburetor. As the air inside the air cleaner warms up, 
                    the sensor shuts down the vacuum and the air inlet gradually 
                    switches to the cold air inlet as the vacuum bleeds out of 
                    the inlet flap mechanism.
For 
                    either the pull wire or vacuum system, There is/was a paper tube down to the breastplate, 
		   and a metal L shaped tube under the breastplate to pick up warm air off the right side finning.
		   If the paper tube is missing and the breastplate hole is open,the L shaped tube underneath is 
		    probably missing too. This means that the pre-heat system has been 
                    disabled (which many people do). We do not recommend this! 
                    But -- if the system is disabled in your car, you must plug 
                    the large hole in the tinware breastpale where the warm air tube connected 
                    to the L-shaped warm air adapter pipe. Otherwise you will 
                    have hot, used cooling air sucked into the engine compartment and into the cooling fan, 
                    contribution to overheating and smelly air in the cabin.
It 
                    is very common practice to remove the thermostat. Again, we 
                    do not recommend this. If the thermostat is removed, the condition 
                    will be the same as if the pre-heater tube were missing -- 
                    the engine would be very slow to warm up and the engine may 
                    run rough.
~~~
Aftermarket Air Cleaners
A 
                    frequently-asked question - I'm thinking about changing out 
                    the big hurky air cleaner on my Bug for a smaller chrome one. 
                    Any advice?
Advice 
                    regarding aftermarket air cleaners generally runs against 
                    them, in favor of the stock VW air cleaners. Although the 
                    chrome filters look nice on a tricked-out engine, our advice 
                    is to retain the oil-bath or paper-filter air cleaner since 
                    it's more reliable and provides several functions which the 
                    aftermarket filters do not. Here are some specifics:
Aftermarket 
                        air cleaners are usually an open design, so there is little 
                        or no pressure drop inside the air cleaner to help the 
                        crankcase breather work the way it should. In extreme 
                        cases, oily mist in the engine compartment may result 
                        from “blow-by” through the crankcase breather.
Many aftermarket air cleaners don't even have any attachment for a breather tube from 
			the oil filler tower.
		        Without this, oil fumes can fill the engine bay, resulting in a very dirty engine.
The 
                        chrome air cleaners usually don't allow for an intake 
                        air pre-heat system. This will make the engine take longer 
                        to warm up on cold mornings.
The 
                        carburetor likes warm air in the winter; without it, ice 
                        may form at the base of the carburetor. The air intake 
                        pre-heat system reduces the possibility of icing up the 
                        carburetor.
It 
                        is possible that the small, chrome cleaner may not provide 
                        enough air through-put, especially as the filter becomes 
                        contaminated. The engine may become starved for air at 
                        high RPM's because the filter element is too restrictive.
The 
                        stock cleaners (both oil bath and paper type) have a "ram 
                        tube" (sometimes also called a "velocity stack") about 
                        three inches high inside the air cleaner, which sits above 
                        the carburetor inlet. This helps smooth the airflow as 
                        it enters the carburetor throat, so you get a more consistent 
                        mixture as the fuel flows out the delivery tube into that 
                        air stream.
The 
                        squat chrome aftermarket cleaners invariably lack this 
                        internal feature, so the airflow into the top of the carburetor 
                        is more turbulent, and a small amount of engine performance 
                        is therefore lost.
If 
                        you doubt the worth of this feature, have a look at almost 
                        any modern engine. Carbureted engines have one ram tube 
                        for each carburetor, and fuel injected cars usually have 
                        one per cylinder, either curved or straight, as part of 
                        the induction manifold.
Rain 
                        will fall through the vents in the decklid, rusting that 
                        chrome in no time at all, unless you have one of those 
                        plastic "rain guards" installed in the underside of the 
                        decklid.
We 
                    must of course give a line or two for an opposing opinion 
                    that we have received - "Taking off the original aircleaner 
                    won't harm the engine at all. Go ahead and change it, it will 
                    do the engine a lot of good, saves weight, looks better. "Everyone" 
                    has one." (And "everyone" is surely right! :-).
Based 
                    on our experience, the "tricked-out" chrome aftermarket air 
                    cleaners have several disadvantages:
The 
                        do not provide pre-heated air to the carburetor for smoother 
                        starting on cold mornings,
They 
                        do not provide sufficient air to the carburetor,
They 
                        do not provide vacuum for positive crankcase ventilation,
They 
                        do not smooth the airflow into the carburetor and thus 
                        ensure a consistent fuel/air mixture,
They 
                        may cause icing of the carburetor.
The 
                    terse bottom line from a source we trust (Bob Hoover) -- "The 
                    aftermarket chromie filter assemblies are bad news."
~~~
Question
- You describe a pull wire on older VW's, older than my '72. 
                    Since VW had moved on to a vacuum based system by '72, I wouldn't 
                    have the pull wire. Considering the construction of my aftermarket 
                    aircleaner doesn't have a means of attaching any vacuum, I'd 
                    like to employ the pull wire instead. Do you know the part 
                    number, or where I would start looking for this wire? I've 
                    tried searching the 'net, but I've been unable to locate one.
Rob 
                    responded
- It's very unlikely you'll find a replacement 
                    pull-wire for the the assembly you want to install on your 
                    72 Westy, but you can easily manufacture that part from the 
                    stock throttle cable used on lawn mowers etc - a stiff inner 
                    wire with coil/wound outer.
The 
                    really tricky part would be getting the control flaps with 
                    the crank projecting out of the shroud under the generator 
                    on the upright Bug engines - these were used on only the '68-'71 
                    models and a lot of the control flaps have been ditched by 
                    "knowledgable" experts over the years so are hard to find... 
                    try
Aircooled.Net
,
BFY 
                    Obsolete Parts
, and wreckers. I don't know if your '72 
                    has the 1600cc upright engine or the 1700cc pancake Type 4 
                    engine (in some countries the 1600cc upright engine was offered 
                    as a cheap option right through the '70s), so I'm not even 
                    sure if the control flaps are the same as for the upright 
                    Bug engine.
The 
                    pull wire looped up behind the carburetor from the control 
                    flap crank, up to the carburetor inlet. This method provides 
                    only warm air (from the paper tube mounted running up from 
                    the right cylinder head) when the engine is cold, and cold 
                    inlet air once the engine has warmed up. The later vacuum-operated 
                    method was better in that it provided mixed warm/cold air 
                    via the temperaure sensor set in the air cleaner which controlled 
                    the vacuum airflow to the flap mechanism in the air inlet. 
                    Having said that, the pull-wire system does help with cold-climate 
                    engine running - a faster warm-up and less stutters whilst 
                    it is warming up.
At 
                    a pinch, you could also use a manual system to operate the 
                    inlet flap. Any arrangment which would hold it closed for 
                    warm-air intake in colder months will work fine. The engine 
                    will be running on warm air all the time but that seems to 
                    work okay too (I've used this on Bug engines with the pullwire 
                    missing).
* 
                      * * * *
Design by
Erin