Alternator/Accelerator Pump Interference
Alternator/Accelerator 
                    Pump Linkage Interference
See 
                    the end of the article for difference between the
German and 
                    Brazilian carburetors.
~~~
Dave's 
                  '73 Super Beetle has a 1971 1600cc dual-port engine. However, 
                  a previous owner (or perhaps the mechanic who rebuilt the engine) 
                  installed an alternator in place of the generator (which were 
                  used on VW engines up until the mid-1973 model year). The alternator, 
                  of course, is "fatter" in diameter at the rear, whereas the 
                  generator is the same diameter over its entire length. This 
                  increased diameter at the rear alternator caused an interference 
                  problem with the accelerator pump linkage in Dave's setup. Dave 
                  replaced the alternator, but the diameter of the new alternator 
                  was the same as the old one, so he had the same interference 
                  with the new alternator.
Specifically, 
                  Dave found that the accelerator pump linkage on the right side 
                  of the carburetor was rubbing against and hanging up on the 
                  alternator body, causing the throttle to be abnormally open 
                  and the idle speed too high. The situation made it impossible 
                  to tune the carburetor properly -- a big problem, very common when an alternator 
		has been installed on a car originally fitted with a generator, according to Rob.
Dave 
                  found that he had to grind the body of the alternator away a 
                  little bit to provide clearance for the accelerator pump linkage 
                  so the throttle lever would close all the way and the screw 
                  at the top of the lever would rest properly on the stepped throttle 
                  cam on the left side of the carburetor.
Dave 
                  found that a PO had left out the two bottom bolts where the 
                  alternator attaches to the fan housing, probably to shift the 
                  alternator over to the right a bit so it would clear the accelerator 
                  pump linkage. When removing the fan shroud with the alternator 
                  attached, Dave found that he had to take the top off of the 
                  carburetor to provide the necessary clearance.
A 
                  number of "fixes" to this interference problem were suggested:
"Speedy 
                        Jim"
wrote to say that "VW used a carburetor linkage 
                        that was "flipped" up-side down to clear the alternator 
                        body. You can also increase the height of the carburetor 
                        using a spacer between the intake manifold and the carburetor."
Rob 
                        commented on this -
Ive never come across this myself, but then I've dealt mostly with 
			generator equiped bugs. Ater checking, it would appear that
			there are two forms of linkage for the 34PICT3 carburettor. Your's 
                        might have had the earlier form of link if that's the 
                        case ('71 carburetor). Since you say that this new carburetor 
                        (Bocar) is exactly identical to the old one in every respect 
                        (except for the size of the main jet), it would appear that your
			replacement also has the earlier form of carb linkage. Since I 
			have not had this problem myself, I haven't ever turned the 
			link upside down. "
John 
                        Connolly
(Aircooled.Net)
suggested -
You have three choices:
Flip the linkage over on the throttle shaft (you can do this 
                          on some carburetors).
Bend  the linkage (I have done this with no ill effects).
Use a spacer under the carburetor as "Speedy Jim" suggests.
Dave 
                      wrote regarding "bending the linkage" - It's actually the 
                      bolt head on the adjusting bell that impacts the alternator 
                      body; I'm not sure how flipping or bending the linkage would 
                      change that.
John 
                      responded - Because the bolt is then on the TOP of the alternator, 
                      not hanging down. Late model carburetors did just this! 
                      Just see if you can invert the linkage that actuates the 
                      accelerator pump so it's on the top. Then, make sure it 
                      works. :-)
Dave 
                      was unable to find a spacer to raise the carburetor -- Rocky 
                      Mountain Motor Works (now
Mid-America 
                      Motor Works
) had one for '61-'70 single-port Bugs, but this is actually a 30/34 adapter plate
			so you can fit the ealier small-flange carbs on to the 1600 twin port manifold, 
			but their catalog doesn't show one for the dual-port 
                      carburetor/intake manifold interface.
Someone wrote about his success putting a spacer under his 34PICT/3 carburetor.  He purchased some gasket material and cut out five gaskets using the regular one as a template.  Then he "pasted" the five gaskets together, coating them with Indian Head lacquer gasket sealant.  He also coated the outside of the bundle with the sealant and let it dry overnight.  This "spacer" raised the carburetor about 3/8 of an inch and solved the interference problem.  "HOLY COW!" he wrote.  "This thing is like a brand new car!  It accelerates like a rocket now ... well maybe not a rocket... But a whole lot faster than grandma with a baby buggy!"  :-)
Dave resolved his interference problem (though not completely) with a little judicious 
                      bending of the accelerator pump linkage and slight grinding 
                      of the alternator body.  A more expensive resolution is replacement of the carburetor.
Aircooled.Net
sells three 34PICT/3 carburetors: a Brazilian Bocar ($179.95), 
                      a Pierburg model ($185), and a German model ($250). The 
                      latter two models clear the alternator; the Brazilian Bocar 
                      carburetor will not. The Brazilian carburetor requires alternator 
                      grinding, which Dave learned the hard way. Dave purchased 
                      a Pierburg 34PICT/3 carburetor from Aircooled.Net, which resolved the interference problem.  Later Dave replaced the carburetor again with a rebuilt German 427-1 model from Keifernet (keifernet@hotmail.com).
* 
                      * * * *
Design by
Erin