Alternator Removal/Installation
Alternator Removal/Installation
~~~
The 
                    following topics are discussed in this article -
Raising 
                        the Fan Housing
Removing 
                        the Alternator
Reassembly
Alternator Pedestal Installation
Alternator 
                        Wiring
~~~
The 
                    alternator can most easily be accomplished with the engine 
                    out of the car, but it can also be done with the engine in 
                    the car by following the steps below.
~~~
Raising the Fan 
                    Housing
Remove the drive belt as follows -
The 
                          front half of the alternator pulley has two cut-out 
                          slots in it. Inserting a thin screw driver in either 
                          slot locks the pulley so you can loosen/tighten the 
                          19mm retaining nut. Remove the retaining nut on the 
                          alternator shaft with the 19mm wrench, then slip off 
                          the washer, any spare shims, and the outer pulley half. 
                          Take note of how many shims are between the pulley halves 
                          so you can easily re-tension the pulley on reassembly.
Slip 
                          the belt off the crankshaft pulley and remove it.
Remove 
                          the inner pulley half, being careful to remove the Woodruff 
                          key and stow it and the shims and nut in a baggie in 
                          a safe place.
Remove 
                        the air cleaner.
Detach 
                        the accelerator cable from the throttle lever and remove 
                        the fuel line from the fuel pump to the carburetor.
Remove 
                        the carburetor.
Pull 
                        out the accelerator cable guide tube and pull the accelerator 
                        cable forward, out of the fan housing.
Remove 
                        the cable from the negative terminal of the battery.
Label 
                        and then detach the electrical connectors from the alternator.
Remove 
                        the strap that holds the alternator to the support.
Disconnect 
                        the ignition cable from the coil and the fresh air tubes 
                        on either side of the fan housing. Disconnect the spark 
                        plug wires from the attachments in the fan housing (three 
                        places).
Remove 
                        the hood and the hood hinge brackets. You must remove 
                        the brackets to get enough clearance to lift the fan shroud.
On 
                  the left side of the car, reach down in front (front) of the 
                  fan housing with a 10mm box-end wrench (ring spanner) and remove 
                  the bolt for the oil cooler cover and the bolt that holds the 
                  fan housing to the oil cooler flange. This is awkward and you'll 
                  be working largely by feel.
Note:
If these two connectors are cheese-head screws, replace 
                      them with 10-mm hex-head bolts. This will save you lots 
                      of trouble reinstalling them and removing them next time 
                      (10-mm open-end wrench (ring spanner) instead of an offset 
                      screwdriver.
Remove 
                        the oil cooler cover and the air duct.
Unbolt 
                        the thermostat and unscrew the thermostat from its rod.
Disconnect 
                        and remove the connecting link between the cooling flaps 
                        in front of the fan housing (don't lose the spring).
Remove 
                        the two bolts on either side of the fan housing. The one 
                        on the left also supports the metal fuel line, and you 
                        may need to disconnect this line from the fuel pump to 
                        move it out of the way.
Raise 
                        the fan housing enough so you can remove the four mounting 
                        bolts from the outer fan cover on the rear of the shroud. 
                        This will allow the alternator/fan assembly to be removed 
                        -- the fan housing can be removed completely at this point 
                        if desired. If the fan housing is simply raised, it helps 
                        to support it on either side with wooden blocks. (Its 
                        really easier to just pull the fan housing out of the 
                        car.)
~~~
Removing the Alternator
Make 
                        sure that the cable from the negative terminal of the 
                        battery is removed.
Make 
                        index marks on the outer fan cover and on the fan housing 
                        (top and side for example) to ensure proper alignment 
                        during reassembly.
With 
                        the fan housing raised, remove the four bolts that hold 
                        the fan cover (with the alternator attached) to the fan 
                        housing.
Pull 
                        the the alternator away from the fan housing.
Reinstall 
                        the pulley and the mounting nut on the alternator shaft.
Drill 
                        a shallow hole in a large wooden block to accomodate the 
                        fan pulley nut on the rear of the alternator shaft. Position 
                        the alternator/fan assembly vertically on the wooden block, 
                        with the nut in the hole you drilled and the fan pulley 
                        resting on the block. Put the 1-7/16" socket on the impact 
                        driver and then use the driver to removed the fan nut 
                        on the other end of the shaft.
Remove 
                        the shims, washer and hub, noting the position of the 
                        shims and washers for reassembly. (You may need to use 
                        a puller to get the hub off of the shaft.)
Remove 
                        the fan, then remove the two 10-mm nuts that are now exposed 
                        and remove inner fan cover, reinforcement flange, and 
                        outer fan cover.
~~~
Reassembly
Install 
                        the fan pulley on the end of the alternator shaft. Make 
                        sure the hub is seated properly on the Woodruff key.
Note:
Most new/rebuilt alternators do not have a pulley installed, 
                      so you may have to switch the pulley from the old unit to 
                      the new/rebuilt one.
Replace 
                        the hub on the fan end of the shaft, making sure the hub 
                        is seated properly on the Woodruff key. Replace the washer 
                        and shims in the same configuration they were in originally.
/P>
Replace 
                        the outer fan cover, the reinforcement flange, and the 
                        inner fan cover. Replace the two 10-mm nuts that hold 
                        the assembly to the alternator and tightened them securely.
Place 
                        a 19mm wrench on the fan pulley nut to hold the alternator 
                        shaft in place, then tighten the 36mm fan-to-alternator 
                        shaft nut to 40 ft-lbs using the 1-7/16" socket.
Using 
                        a feeler gauge, measure the distance between the fan and 
                        fan cover. The recommended clearance is 0.08 inch (2.0 
                        mm). If the clearance is incorrect, adjust it by varying 
                        the number of shims under the thrust washer. Store unused 
                        shims between the thrust washer and nut.
Turn 
                        the fan by hand to check for binding.
Install 
                        the alternator fan assembly into the fan housing. Make 
                        sure the four bolts that hold the outer fan cover to the 
                        housing are securely tightened.
NOTE:
the slot on the inside of the 
			fan mounting plate MUST face downwards. This draws cooling air through the 
			alternator into the fan housing.
Reinstall 
                        the alternator pedestal, making sure to place gaskets 
                        on either side of the internal baffle. Tighten the four 
                        nuts securely with a 13mm wrench.
Reinstall 
                        the fan housing in the car. Make sure the thermostat connecting 
                        rod is positioned correctly and does not bind. Be sure 
                        to properly adjust the thermostat (see Thermostat Installation 
                        procedure).
Reconnect 
                        the cooling vane connector rod to the left cooling vanes.
Reinstall 
                        the oil cooler vent tube and oil cooler tin. Make sure 
                        to use hex-head bolts to facilitate installation.
Reinstall 
                        and the drive belt in accordance with the
Drive 
                        Belt Check, Adjustment and Replacement
procedure.
Reinstall 
                        the carburetor and accelerator cable. Reattach the fuel 
                        line from the fuel pump.
Check 
                        closely for interference between the accelerator pump 
                        linkage and the body of the alternator. It may be necessary 
                        to place a spacer under the carburetor to raise it a bit 
                        and/or flop the accelerator pump linkage around so that 
                        it doesn't rub on the alternator.
~~~
Alternator Wiring
If 
                    you are replacing an alternator which uses an external voltage 
                    regulator (mounted under the rear seat) with an alternator 
                    having an internal voltage regulator, do the following:
Remove 
                        the small blue wire and the small green wire from the 
                        regulator (terminals (61) and (DF) respectively).
Cut 
                        off the push-on connectors from these wires and connect 
                        them together using a "butt" connector.
Connect 
                        the small green wire to the (D+) terminal on the alternator.
Remove 
                        the two large red wires from the (B+) terminal of the 
                        regulator. Cut off the push on connectors from these wires 
                        and splice them together with the red wire that WAS on 
                        the D+ terminal on the old generator using a "butt" connector. 
                        These two wires carry up to 50 amps to the battery, so 
                        the new connector MUST be big enough to handle that current.
Connect 
                        the red wire that was on the D+ teminal of the generator 
                        to the B+ terminal on the new alternator.
Reconnect 
                        the large red wire or a new 10-gauge red wire from the 
                        (B+) terminal on the alternator to the "30" terminal on 
                        the starter solenoid.
Note:
Do not run the alternator without being connected properly 
                      from the (B+) terminal to the positive battery terminal. 
                      This can cause damage to the alternator!
Reconnect 
                        the cable to the negative terminal on the battery.
The 
                        (D+) terminal on the alternator
must
be connected 
                        to a working "Alt" light in the instrument cluster.
Note:
A failed bulb will cause the alternator not to charge.
Check 
                        to make sure this bulb is working by turning on the ignition 
                        key (do not activate the starter motor!) If the "Alt" 
                        light in the instrument cluster comes on, the bulb is 
                        working and the alternator is grounded.
* * * * *
Design by
Erin