Alternator/Generator
Alternator/Generator
The 
                    following is mostly based on Dave's experience
with the replacement 
                    of the alternator in his '73 Super
Beetle, with input from Rob and others, 
                    and pertinent
questions and answers added as appropriate.
~~~
The 
                  material is subdivided as follows -
Generator/Alternator/Dynamo 
                    -- General Discussion
Generator/Alternator 
                    Output
Generator 
                    Polarization
Generator 
                    Troubleshooting
Generator/Alternator 
                    vs Model Year
Replacement 
                    of a Generator with an Alternator
Alternator/Accelerator 
                    Pump Linkage Interference
Alternator/Generator 
                    Stand
Alternator 
                    Pulley Installation
Alternator 
                    Rebuilding
Alternator 
                    Replacement
Alternator 
                    and Engine Compartment Wiring
Alternator 
                    Grounding
"Idiot 
                    Light" Problems
Miscellaneous 
                    Questions and Answers
~~~
Alternator/Generator/Dynamo
-- General Discussion --
A technical point 
                  to begin with to clear any confusion -- generators and dynamos 
                  are the same thing - direct current generators. An alternator 
                  is different -- it produces alternating current, which must 
                  be 'rectified' to direct current before it's used to charge 
                  the battery etc. The word 'dynamo' is often used in the UK, 
                  but not so much elsewhere -- most other countries call it a 
                  'generator.'
The 
                  generator has the same diameter down its entire length, between 
                  the pulley and fan housing. The alternator is the same diameter 
                  to the generator in the area where it sits on the support stand, 
                  but it is larger in diameter at the pulley end, where it overhangs 
                  the support stand.
A 
                  common problem -- the battery goes dead. It has no charge, but 
                  when the battery is 'jumped' the engine will start and continue 
                  to run.
A 
                  problem almost everyone has experienced -
Yesterday 
                  I left my parking lights on all day (it was raining on the way 
                  to work) and the battery was 90% flat when I got in the car 
                  (dim dash lights - no cranking). Luckily the car park is on 
                  a slight slope so I was able to push it, jump in and pop the 
                  clutch, and away I went. I don't think the battery really had 
                  enough volts for the ignition, but with generators, you only 
                  need a couple of volts for it to self-energise and so if the 
                  clutch popping gives you enough rpm the generator immediately 
                  runs up to it's 14.5 volts and the coil says "great - sparks 
                  are on the way". The alternators won't do that - they need almost 
                  the full 12 reference volts (via the blue wire and the dash 
                  light) before they can start generating power. So you are more 
                  likely to need a jump start to get 12 volts from a good battery. 
                  In other words, generators are more tolerant of the sick/flat 
                  battery.
A 
                  new battery may solve the problem of the battery going dead 
                  for a while, but then a few months later the car won't start 
                  again. If jumped it works fine, but the battery doesn't seem 
                  to be getting a charge.
When 
                  faced with this situation, take an electrical meter (see our 
                  discussion of
VOM operation
) and first 
                  measure the voltage across the battery. With the engine off, 
                  set the meter to "DC volts" (15 or 20 volt range), then simply apply 
                  the two leads from the meter to the two battery terminals. The 
                  reading for a fully-charged battery is about 12.6 volts. A dead 
                  battery will read ten volts or less.
To 
                  check the output of the generator/alternator (that is, to make 
                  sure a charging current is going to the battery), start the 
                  engine and read the voltage across the battery terminals as 
                  before. As the engine speeds up, the voltage should increase 
                  to about 14.2-14.5 volts. If it does, then the generator/alterator 
                  is working properly and charging the battery as it should.
If 
                  you don't have a meter you can try the following (less effective) 
                  test: remove the positive terminal from of the battery with 
                  the engine running. If the engine continues to run, the generator/alternator 
                  is okay. If the engine dies, there is a problem in the electrical 
                  charging system.
Note:
Some have suggested disconnecting the wires from the (D+) and 
                  (DF) terminals on the alternator/generator, then connecting 
                  an ammeter across the terminals to check the operation of the 
                  generator/alternator. To do this you would need to put a high-amp 
                  ampmeter in series with the main red wire (D+) to read the amperage 
                  going into the battery. The simple tests above are the easiest.
If 
                  the alternator/generator test shows an output of less than 14 
                  volts or so, check the voltage regulator before writing off 
                  the generator/alternator. If you have an external voltage regulator 
                  it with be under the rear seat on the left.
Note:
Up until 1967 the voltage regulator was located on top of the 
                  generator. From 1967 until 1974 it was located underneath the 
                  rear seat on the left. From 1974 on the voltage regulator is 
                  internal to the alternator. If the 6-volt Bug has been converted 
                  to 12 volts, the 12-volt regulator is usually screwed to the 
                  fan shroud just above the generator so the existing wiring can be used.
The 
                  function of a voltage regulator is to maintain a precise voltage 
                  regardless of the current drawn by the load. With meter switched 
                  to DC volts and probes on positive and negative terminals of 
                  the battery, read the voltage as before (again, should be a 
                  bit more than 12 volts). Then start the engine but don't rev 
                  it up. Slowly increase the engine speed to maybe 2000 rpm. The 
                  voltage should climb up to 14.2-14.5 volts and remain level 
                  there. If so, the alternator/generator and voltage regulator 
                  are good.
If 
                  the voltage does
not
go up as the engine speed is increased, 
                  check to see that the generator brushes are not worn excessivly. 
                  If you can, apply a little pressure on the brushes while the 
                  engine is running and see if the generator lights goes out or 
                  the voltmeter reading increases. If it does, the brushes may 
                  be worn to the point that they don't exert enough pressure on 
                  the commutator.
Speedy 
                  Jim
gives a good method for
testing 
                  a generator
on his Web site.
Now, 
                  if the alternator/generator and voltage regulator are both okay, 
                  it is likely that there is a short somewhere in the system that 
                  is draining the battery. Test for this as follows -
Take 
                    the positive cable off the battery.
Connect 
                    the VOM meter between the positive battery cable and the positive 
                    post on the battery.
If 
                    set to DC Volts, the meter will respond to the slightest drain. 
                    If it shows a drain, switch to DC milliamps. Any reading over, 
                    say, 5 milliamps is suspect.
From 
                    that point you must disconnect things to find what is causing 
                    the electrical drain. Start by removing the fuses one by one 
                    until you find the culprit.
Trace 
                    the circuits associated with the offending fuse to find the 
                    short.
If 
                  the car has been left out and not run for a period of time, 
                  electrical problems could result. VW used fairly simple connectors 
                  in the electrical system, and quite often just shining up the 
                  contacts can fix problems. Connections to consider include the following -
In 
                    the case of a generator or alternator, clean the contacts 
                    on the generator/alternator itself, and then the regulator 
                    contacts under the back seat, left-hand side.
There 
                    is a heavy red wire from the regulator to the battery on the 
                    other side. Brighten up the connectors on both ends of this 
                    wire. If your car has had an alternator installed, you might find that a previous 
		   owner has taken a heavy red wire from the alternator direct to the starter motor, 
		   (connected it to the battery cable from the + post on the battery) 
		   rather than through the wiring harness to under the rear seat.
		   This usually works fine, but it does mean that the battery charging wire 
		   is subject to the dirt and grime under the car.
If 
                    your car has no regulator under the seat, it's a later alternator 
                    model which has the regulator inside the alternator itself. 
                    On these models, there should still be a heavy red wire tracking 
                    from the left side across to the battery, and this might have 
                    some connectors on it -- clean them up. With the stock VW wiring, this is the wire which 
                    charges the battery, and also supplies the car with power 
                    from the battery.
Also 
                    look at the heavy red wires in the luggage compartment. The 
                    red wire from the wiring loom on the left side leading to 
                    the headlight switch is the main power lead, then two red 
                    wires come from the headlight switch -- one to the ignition 
                    switch, and one straight to the fuse block (this one works 
                    those electrical things which operate even with the ignition 
                    off, such as interior light, radio etc). Make sure all these 
                    connectors are clean so the power can get where it needs to.
There 
                    is one additional wire (a thin one) from the alternator to 
                    the "Gen/Alt" indicator light in the instrument cluster. It 
                    is essential that this wire be in place -- otherwise the alternator 
                    cannot charge. On alternator cars, even if the indicator light 
                    burns out, the alternator can't charge -- it uses a tiny signal 
                    current through this bulb to activate the alternator. 
		   It's not the same situation with the older generator 
                    models -- if the indicator light blows it can still charge.
~~~
Generator Polarization
Questions 
                  are often asked regarding the need to polarize a generator. 
                  If the generator is charging (the battery stays charged) then 
                  you don't have to polarize it. When a generator has been left 
                  unused for a long time (months or years), the metal core looses 
                  it's magnetism, and all generators NEED a little residual magnetism to 
                  start the charging process. Polarizing just gives it enough 
                  "boost" in magnetism to start it charging properly. When it's 
                  being used, it keeps its core polarized so there is no need to do 
                  it again.
Note:
Why do generators need to be "polarized"? Automobile generators 
                  need some magnetism to get started. This "residual" magnetism 
                  remains in the field pole pieces even after the engine has stopped. 
                  The next time the generator starts up, the residual magnetism 
                  creates a small voltage in the armature windings. Not enough 
                  to charge the battery, but enough to allow the field windings 
                  to draw current. As the field current increases, the pole pieces 
                  create even more magnetism. That makes even more voltage in 
                  the armature, and the cycle continues until the generator is 
                  capable of producing maximum output.
What 
                  happens though to a generator which has been stored a long time 
                  or is freshly rebuilt? The residual magnetism may have decreased 
                  to the point where it can no longer get the generator started 
                  producing voltage. In the case of a new generator or one which 
                  has been mis-treated, the residual may even be of the wrong 
                  direction (North and South poles reversed). Polarization is 
                  a simple process used to restore the field pole residual magnetism 
                  and ensure the magnetic direction is correct.
To 
                  polarize a generator, connect a jumper wire from the (DF) terminal 
                  on the generator to the generator frame. Remove the fan belt, 
                  then connect a wire from the positive terminal on the battery 
                  to the (D+) terminal on the generator. The generator shaft should 
                  start to spin.
Note:
Don't run the generator this way for more than a few seconds 
                  to avoid overheating.
The 
                  generator will now be properly polarized. If the generator did
not
spin during this process, the generator is most likely 
                  defective.
Put 
                  the fan belt back on and re-test the generator voltage with 
                  the (DF) terminal grounded. If the output voltage is still low, 
                  the generator is defective.
Note:
Voltage regulators
do not need to be polarized -- they are not 
                  polarity sensitive. Even if voltage regulator came with instructions 
                  to polarize it -- these instructions actually polarize the generator, 
                  not the regulator. The regulator manufacturer simply wants to 
                  make sure that your generator will work properly so you don't 
                  blame the voltage regulator.
alternators
never need to be polarized. Alternators use an electrical trigger 
                  current to start the process of charging - electromagnetism, 
                  so don't need any internal magnetism to begin with, the way a generator 
                  does.
That 
                  trigger current is supplied via the alternator dash light (it's 
                  a tiny current and won't make the light glow when the engine 
                  is running) so if that bulb blows - the battery won't get charged 
                  and it will go flat. Curious circuitry VW used, but it works 
                  just fine. So that means that with an alternator equipped VW, 
                  you should always glance at the dash as you turn the key and 
                  make sure the Alt light does glow with just the key on, just 
                  to make sure that that circuit is intact.
~~~
Miscellaneous Questions and Answers
Note:
Our
Generator Troubleshooting
article may be useful.
Question
- I have a 1972 Beetle with a red generator light permanently 
                  on. I have changed the brushes and regulator, and still a red 
                  light. A problem with further fault finding is the wiring isn't 
                  all original, lots of do-it-yourself stuff. I have checked continuity 
                  though and all seems fine. But could you please help deciphering 
                  which contacts are which -- in my manual (D+), (D-) and (DF) 
                  are all close together, yet well labelled. But unfortunately 
                  the connections on my generator are positioned differently. 
                  Two towards the pulley and one towards the front (fan). Do you 
                  know which are which?
Rob 
                  responded
- Does the battery go flat, or is it keeping 
                  its charge? If it's going flat, then the red light is telling 
                  the true story; but if the battery is being charged, then the 
                  light is telling lies and IT'S at fault.
On 
                  my '71 engine, there are only (D+) and (DF) connections - there 
                  is a black plastic connection block with two connectors for 
                  wires. Some models do have a separate (D-) connection -- this 
                  is the one nearest the fan, and should be a brown wire.
The 
                  (D+) connection has the thick red (or red/black) wire attached 
                  to it -- it should be a large spade connector on the left side 
                  of the connector block (in earlier years is has a brass bolt/nut 
                  type connection). This is the main charging wire.
The 
                  (DF) connection (usually a thinner green wire with a smaller 
                  spade connector) is on the right side of the connector block. 
                  The (DF) connection supplies power to the field windings to 
                  produce the magnetic field inside the generator.
The 
                  (D+) red (or red/black) wire goes to the upper regulator (under 
                  the back seat) connection on the engine (rearmost) side of the 
                  regulator. The (DF) green wire goes to the lower connector on 
                  the same side of the regulator.
On 
                  the front end of the regulator, the upper connection (#61) should 
                  have a thin blue wire attached. This blue wire goes to the "Gen" 
                  warning light in the instrument cluster. The lower connector, 
                  (B+), has two thick red wires -- one to the battery and one 
                  to the headlight switch up front (which is used as a junction 
                  box for the main power supply up front). There may also be a 
                  thinner red wire connected there too -- I think that one goes 
                  to the headlight dipping relay up front.
Question
- I want so much to have the generator of my Volkswagen reconstructed 
                  or have the rewinding done.
Rob 
                  responded
- The VW generator can be rewound by any 
                  competent automobile electrician -- it works the same as any 
                  older style generator, and most auto electricians can still 
                  rebuild generators.
Question
- I've heard that generators needed a higher rpm to charge the 
                  battery, like cruising speed, but that alternators need only 
                  the idling speed to charge the battery.
Rob 
                  responded
- That's partly true. Alternators can charge 
                  the battery at idle rpm because they usually have a smaller 
                  pulley, so in fact they spin faster than a generator for the 
                  same engine rpm. That means they will charge the battery at 
                  lower ENGINE rpm but the alternator itself is spinning faster 
                  than a generator does.
The 
                  VW generator is called an "early cut-in" generator, so it starts 
                  to charge the battery at speeds just above idle - from about 
                  1000-1200 engine rpm. It will provide more current at higher 
                  rpm of course, up to it's rated maximum of 30 amps (for the 
                  12-volt generators).
Question
- In the case of a failing generator, would it be wise to convert 
                  to an alternator instead of having the generator repaired?
Rob 
                  responded
- You can do that if you want to, but it 
                  requires a little alteration to the car's wiring.
Speedy 
                  Jim
has the necessary changes to the circuits on his web 
                  site.
Question
- Does a few Amperes make a difference?
Rob 
                  responded
- The higher amperage of the alternators 
                  makes no difference at all if you have stock VW electrics -- 
                  it's only useful if you have spot lights, a big stereo and stuff 
                  like that added.
Question
- The alternator that by Beetle has is rated at 45 amperes, 
                  for Toyota cars. There's one available, specifically made for 
                  the Beetle, rated at 51 amperes. Physically, the 51 amp alternator 
                  looks about a third bigger and much heavier than the 45 amp 
                  alternator. Maybe it gives more power? Will it put less strain 
                  on the battery?
Rob 
                  responded
- The beetle's wiring will handle the VW 
                  50-amp alternator OK, but if you use a higher power alternator 
                  than that ('75 VW alternators are available) then you might 
                  need to increase the wire size for the charging circuit to the 
                  battery.
A 
                  bigger size alternator won't reduce the load on the battery. 
                  It's main load comes from using the starter motor, and that 
                  won't change. A bigger alternator will recharge a flat battery 
                  faster of course, but the 30 amp generator does work just fine 
                  for most old VWs. The 50-amp alternator was added in 1973 when 
                  they added fresh air fans and other extra electrical items to 
                  the cars.
* 
                    * * * *
Design by
Erin