Alternator Wiring
Engine Compartment Wiring
(Without CDI or CompuFire)
Wiring for both internal and external voltage
regulators is covered in this article.
~~~
The following topics are discussed in this article -
Engine Compartment Wiring
"Stock" Coil/Distributor Wiring (no CDI or electronic ignition)
Alternator with Internal Voltage Regulator
Alternator with External Voltage Regulator
Necessity for the Alternator Warning Light
Converting from an External Voltage Regulator Alternator to One With an Internal Voltage Regulator
~~~
Engine Compartment Wiring
When a short in the wire to the backup lights burned out the ignition 
              switch and shut him down, Dave decided that it would be prudent 
              to rewire the whole engine compartment, since he found a number 
              of other areas in which insulation had either worn off or burned 
              off the wires. The "stock" wiring arrangement in the engine compartment 
              (no CDI or CompuFire) is shown roughly in the following diagram. 
              (See more on the
"Stock" Coil/Distributor Wiring
below.)
Rough Schematic of Engine Wiring
~~~
In process of this engine re-wiring job, Dave installed what he 
              calls a "power block" on the left fresh air nozzle to keep all of 
              the wiring straight. Following is a very rough wiring diagram showing 
              the wiring layout on the power block, followed by a photograph of 
              the power block after the engine compartment re-wiring was complete.
Power Block Wiring 
                Layout
The Power Block
New Engine Wiring
~~~
Not long after completing his engine re-wiring, Dave accidentally 
              pulled the wire to the automatic choke loose when the key was on 
              (Dave had just completed timing the distributor); the wire, which 
              was hot, of course, fell down and shorted against the alternator 
              -- causing the ignition switch to burn out AGAIN! To prevent this 
              from happening in the future, it was suggested to Dave that he put 
              a 25-amp fuse in the wire that goes from the ignition switch back 
              to the engine compartment, right near the switch at the plug. Such 
              a fuse, the guy said, "will power everything, but blow if something 
              screws up, which will kill power to the sensitive stuff. Better 
              to replace a
fuse
that a
switch
."
A good idea. Dave has now replaced his ignition switch again for 
              the second time and has installed a 25-amp fuse in the wire from 
              the ignition switch, just "upstream" of the power block he installed 
              in his engine compartment.
~~~
"Stock" Coil/Distributor Wiring
(No CDI or electronic ignition)
Coil/Distributor Wiring
The black wire coming into the positive terminal on the coil (#15) is from fuse #12, which receives power from the ignition switch. Note three black wires leading from that terminal - one to the automatic choke, one to the backup lights, and one to the idle cut-off valve on the carburetor. The positive terminal on the coil is just a convenient place to obtain power to these three components. The fact that these components receive power from a terminal on the coil has nothing to do with the operation of the coil itself. The three wires could each go up to fuse #12 individually, but that would be very inconvenient. So VW chose this configuration.
You may have to get creative about how you attach so many wires 
              to the single terminal on the coil. Any auto supply store can sell 
              you a little T-shaped adaptor that will fit on the terminal, with 
              three "wings" (if you will) to which the three black wires can be 
              attached.
Please be sure to use black wire for this purpose -- black means "power 
            when the ignition switch is on" in the VW world.
~~~
Alternator with Internal 
                Voltage Regulator
When wiring an alternator with an internal voltage regulator, remove 
              the blue and green wires from the old external regulator under the back seat and splice 
              them together. Run the green wire to the (D+) terminal on the new 
              alternator. This provides the wiring to the indicator light, which 
              is an essential sensing part of the alternator internal wiring.
See the wiring diagram above ("Rough Schematic of Engine Wiring") for the alternator with an internal 
              voltage regulator.
Alternator and 
                Engine Compartment Wiring
(See also
Alternator 
                Replacement
.)
~~~
Alternator with External 
                Voltage Regulator
This wiring diagram is courtesy of
"Speedy 
                Jim,"
the smartest person we know when it comes to VW electrics.
~~~
Converting from an 
                External VR Alternator to One With an Internal VR
The following was written by Rob Boardman.
When wiring your new alternator with an internal voltage regulator, 
              you must disconnect BOTH wires from the (B+) terminal on the old 
              external voltage regulator, but keep them spliced together (they 
              should currently have a double spade connector on the regulator), 
              and then add the red wire from the (D+) on the regulator to make 
              a three way splice.
In the process the red wire that WAS on the (D+) gets moved to 
              the (B+) terminal. Since the voltage regulator is now internal, 
              you just bypass the old regulator with the red wires. (You might 
              need to put an small extension in this wire if it's not long enough 
              to meet the other two -- if so make sure it's of similar thickness).
All of the red wire is 10-gauge (larger).
"Speedy 
              Jim"
reminds us that you need to have substantial connectors 
              for this job. In Australia the hardware stores sell 240-volt screw 
              type connectors in either 15amp or 30amp varieties. There are two 
              types -- single hole where the wires are twisted and poked in the 
              one hole and the screw tightened (these usually have a nice soft 
              plastic cover over them -- self insulating), and a block type where 
              you can poke in wires from either end and screw two screws up to 
              tighten each wire. This type has the lower amp rating.
I'm not sure what you'd have in the U.S. with your 110-volt standard, 
              but choose the heaviest and it should be fine. The "single hole" 
              type are particulaly good as you twist the wires before poking in 
              the hole. This means the screw just jams the wires together and 
              the brass "bolt" doesn't actually carry much current. In the double 
              ended type, the brass block carries all the current from one wire 
              to the other.
My reason for saying this is that the red wires carry up to 50 
              amps, so the three way splice MUST be substantial. Dont scrimp on this connection - 
              or you could get overheating, and since it's under the back seat, I'd hate to see a 
              fire starting there. The thin wires can be any screw or clip connector, 
              since that carries only a small current.
What you end up with under the back seat is a three way splice of 
              the heavy red wires - one gong to the alternator, one across the 
              seat to the battery positive post, and one running forwards through 
              the wiring loom to power the car's electrics (it actually runs up to 
              the headlight switch block, which VW used as a junction box). You also 
              splice the thin blue and green wires together are removing them from the
              voltage regulator - this provides power to the dash Alt/Gen light.
~~~
Necessity for the 
                Alternator Warning Light
It is absolutely essential that the (D+) terminal on the alternator 
              be connected to a functioning "Alt" warning light in the instrument 
              cluster. If this light is missing or defective, the alternator will 
              NOT charge the battery! See my hand-drawn wiring diagram above. 
              Also see
Speedy 
              Jim's diagram
, which is much better than mine!
The system is very simple, but it's absolutely critical that you 
              get it right. The (D+) terminal on the alternator MUST connect to 
              a functioning warning light in the instrument cluster. There should 
              be just one wire (blue) from the (D+) connector on the alternator 
              to the button on the bottom of the normal indicator light in the 
              dash. The dash light is also wired from the (D+) (Blue) to ignition 
              terminal #15 on the coil, which in turn is connected to the positive 
              (+) post on the battery (Black). There is no ground wire on the 
              light; the body of the bulb is connected to ground via the light 
              holder (which also provides the ground connection for the other 
              dash lights as well.) The three bulbs (ALT/OIL/TURN) all have a 
              common connection in the socket which also goes to ignition terminal 
              #15 on the coil (which receives power from the (+) post on the battery 
              by way of the ignition switch).
The alternator must get a feedback current through the "Alt" lamp 
              in the instrument cluster so it can sense the battery voltage; it 
              uses that as part of the alternator's internal circuitry needed 
              to charge the battery. In other words, with the ignition on but 
              engine off, the indicator light sees 12 volts from the battery (via 
              the same wiring that goes to the ignition terminal #15 on the coil), 
              and nothing on the other side so it glows, but with the engine 
              running, it also sees 12v (actually 14v since the alternator is now spinning) 
              both sides of the bulb - one wire from the battery and one wire from the alternator, so it does not glow.
If the alternator dies or the fan belt breaks, there 
              is no voltage on (D+) (looks like ground) and current flows from 
              #15 thru the lamp to (D+), and the "Alt" lamp comes on to warn the 
              driver of a problem.
An LED light usually won't work for this purpose. LED's are diodes and 
              will not allow current to flow in the opposite direction. And they use 
              so little current there's no guarantee that there will be enough current 
              flow to excite the alternator into charging. So it's best to stick with the 
              stock BA9 filament bulb for the Alt/Gen light.
The 12-volt 2-watt indicator bulbs are available at any VW parts 
              store. The same bulb is used for the speedometer illumination bulbs 
              (two of them) and the other indicator bulbs in the instrument cluster. 
              In a pinch you can borrow one of the illumination bulbs to replace 
              a blown Alt indicator bulb -- the speedometer will be a bit dim 
              on one side but can still be seen until you get a replacement bulb.
* * * * *
Design by
Erin