Crankcase Pulley Removal
Crankcase Pulley Removal and Reinstallation
Getting the crankshaft pulley off is fairly difficult.  It is easiest if you have the engine out of the car.  Even then, you have to lock the flywheel in place to prevent it from turning.  See our
flywheel removal procedure
to see how to do that.
If you need to remove the crankshaft pulley with the engine in 
              the car, you still need to hold the crankshaft firmly in place (prevent 
              it from turning) so that you can apply torque to the pulley nut. 
              The book says to do that by placing the transmission in 4th gear 
              and setting the parking brake (I've never done that -- I'm skeptical.)
With the crankshaft held firmly stationary, you can remove the 
              bolt and washer from the center of the crankcase pulley. With the 
              bolt and washer off, you still have to use a puller to remove the 
              pulley from the crankshaft.
Removing the Crankcase 
                Pulley with a Puller
Don't try to pry the pulley off -- you can easily damage the crankcase 
              by doing so.
Replace the pulley if it is bent or cracked.
~~~
Crankcase 
              Pulley Replacement-
Note:
You
must
install the breast plate before you install the 
                crank pulley. If you install the crank pulley first, the two bolts 
                that secure the breast plate to the engine block will not be accessible.
Install the new engine breast plate with two 10mm bolts that 
                secure it to the engine block.
Engine Breast Plate
~~~
Crankshaft Pulley
~~~
Install the new crank pulley -
To replace the pulley, first clean the pulley hub. Extra-fine 
                  emery cloth can be used to remove dry rust or corrosion. A fine 
                  file can be used to remove or repaair any burrs. Clean the oil 
                  return thread on the pulley hub and coat it with molybdenum 
                  grease.
Make certain that the key on the crankshaft lines up with 
                  the pulley keyway and is firmly seated.
Start the pulley on the crankshaft -- simply push it onto 
                  the crank as far as you can by hand. It should slide on fairly 
                  easily. Then draw it into place with the center bolt onto the 
                  threads on the end of the crankshaft.
Start the crank pulley bolt on the threads on the end of the 
                  crankshaft.  Tighten the bolt using a 1-1/4" socket (a bit 
                  large, but it will work). Tightening the bolt down will pull 
                  the new crank pulley onto the end of the crank.
Torque the bolt to about 35 ft-lb
Note:
Again, you must hold the crankshaft firmly in place 
                  (and prevent the engine from turning over) to apply torque to the crankcase pulley bolt.  Do this by placing a 1-7/16" 
                  socket on the flywheel nut, with a 4-foot "cheater" (just an 
                  ordinary pipe) against the floor so the crankshaft will not 
                  move.
Note:
It doesn't matter where on the pulley the keyway is. When you 
                  turn it so that the keyway is at 9 o'clock, piston #1 should 
                  be at TDC, and the TDC mark on the pulley should line up with 
                  the crankcase split.
If the pulley seems tight or does not install easily, follow 
                  these steps:
Immerse the new pulley in very hot tap water until the pulley 
                    is hot to the touch. This will expand the pulley slightly, 
                    making it easier to slip onto the crankshart.
Apply a thin layer of "white" grease to the pulley hub serface, 
                    then place the pulley on the crankshaft, making certain that 
                    the key on the shaft lines up with the pulley keyway and the 
                    key is seated on the key in the crankshaft.
Note:
If you find it 
                    necessary to tap the pulley to slide it onto the crankshaft, 
                    gently tap the center hub only with a rubber hammer or block 
                    of wood. Never strike the outer rim of the pulley.
You will install the fanbelt and the pulley tin later. Installation 
                  of that tin must be done in coordination with the installation 
                  of the air deflector tins, the cylinder covers, the muffler 
                  header, and the pre-heat tubes.
* 
                * * * *
Design by
Erin