Rear Suspension
Rear Suspension
See also our
Rear Suspension Procedure
.
~~~
Topics in this article -
From the Manuals
The Wisdom of Rob Boardman
Independent Rear Suspension (IRS)
Disassembly
Repacking and Reinstalling Bearings
The CV Joints
Double Spring Plates
Removing the Rear Wheel Bearings on 
                      a Swing Axle Bug
Rob's Wisdom Resulting from Questions -
Swing Axle vs IRS
Conversion -- Swing Axle to 
                        IRS
Shock Absorbers
Rear Suspension Alignment/Adjustment
IRS Adjustment
Camber
-Sagging- Rear End
Lowering the Rear End (e.g., for 
                        Sandrail
)
-Floating- Rear End on Ice
Rear End -Sway-
~~~
From the Manuals
Bentley -
Each rear axle is independently sprung by means of torsion bars, 
                trailing links (spring plates), and hydraulic shock absorbers. 
                The wheels are driven by the double-jointed axles that have two 
                constant velocity joints on each shaft.
Haynes -
All pre-1969 models, except the 1968 Super Beetle with Automatic 
                Stick Shift, are equipped with swing axles at the rear. The 1968 
                Super Beetle with Automatic Stick Shift and all 1969 and later 
                models are equipped with driveaxles with constant velocity (CV) 
                joints.
Regardless of axle type, the rear wheels are independently sprung 
                on all models. A splined tube welded to the rear crossmember of 
                the frame anchors transverse torsion bars at their inner ends. 
                The splined outer ends of the torsion bars carry hubbed spring 
                plates, to which the axle tube (swing axle models) or diagonal 
                arm (driveaxle models) is attached. The splined hubs at the front 
                ends of the spring plates also allow suspension adjustment. Shock 
                absorbers control damping.
On 1967 and 1968 swing axle models, an equalizer spring provides 
                additional progressive spring action to assist the torsion bars 
                when the vehicle is loaded down. Because its operating levers 
                slant in opposite directions, the action of the equalizer spring 
                doesn-t affect body roll, so the front end of the vehicle is able 
                to absorb more roll to provide improved cornering.
On later models with driveaxles and CV joints, a pair of large 
                trailing arms, known as diagonal arms, absorb lateral forces generated 
                by the outer ends of the driveaxles and transfer them to the frame. 
                The rear suspension on early and later models are otherwise fairly 
                similar.
~~~
The Wisdom of Rob 
                Boardman
VW rear suspensions sometimes sag as the car ages, especially if 
              it has carried a few large loads. My 1970 1500cc Beetle has carried 
              more than its fair share of loads (I refuse to read the -maximum 
              axle load- section of the Owner-s handbook, or it might scare me!) 
              I-ve had to do this job twice in the 27 years I-ve owned the car.
~~~
Independent Rear 
                Suspension (IRS) Rear Axle
The IRS rear suspension first appeared in 1968 in the semi-auto 
              Beetle. In 1969 the rest of the US Beetles got the IRS; and in most 
              other countries, IRS became standard in 1971, although the base 
              model 1200cc which was sold mostly in Eastern Europe remained swing 
              axle.
The IRS suspension consists of a stub axle to which the brake drums 
              attaches, and a drive shaft with a constant velocity joint at each 
              end which connects between the stub axle and the gearbox. This enables 
              the wheels to move vertically up and down instead of swinging in 
              an arc as per the original VW design.
The assembly is quite strong and will give long life if properly 
              maintained.
Regreasing of the axles and constant velocity joints is not difficult, 
              but it is a VERY messy job, so have plenty of rags or paper towels, 
              and if you prefer to keep your hands semi-clean, latex gloves.
The stub axle has two greased bearings, a roller bearing at the 
              brake-drum end, and a ball bearing at the gearbox end. The roller 
              bearing takes most of the up and down load, and the ball bearing 
              takes the side thrust in cornering. There are three spacers in the 
              assembly, consisting of a tube between the two bearings, about two 
              inches long, and a thick ring shaped spacer on the other side of 
              each bearing. Two grease seals fit around the outer spacers. The 
              two ring shaped spacers each have one chamfered edge and it-s VERY 
              important that these be installed the right way round, so the whole 
              stack of bearing inner races and spacers makes a stack of the right 
              length; the brake drum and 36mm nut then holding the stack together 
              and aligning the bearings. The axle shaft itself has a flange on 
              the gearbox side, which the CV joint is attached to, and this forms 
              the inner side of the stack previously mentioned.
The gearbox-side spacer has a chamfer on the inner circumference, 
              and the brake drum side spacer has a chamfer on the outer circumference. 
              You will understand that as soon as you see them. Both chamfers 
              must face the gearbox, NOT the brake drum.
The stub axle bearings are greased with Lithium wheel bearing grease, 
               the same grease is used in the front wheel bearings, Castrol 
              LM or similar.
The CV joints are lubricated with black Moly grease (the pack usually 
              says "contains 3% Molybdenum Disulphide") and is sometimes called 
              Extreme Pressure grease, Castrol LMM or similar.
~~~
Disassembly
Do one side at a time from start to finish (there-s a reason 
                for this). Remove the hub cap and the split pin from the 36mm 
                nut holding the brake drum. Loosen the 36mm nut, THEN jack the 
                wheel off the ground. Support it on a jack stand (don-t trust 
                just the jack).
Remove the brake drum (you can leave the wheel attached if you 
                wish).
Now you have the wheel off for easy access, crawl under the 
                car where you-ll see the two constant velocity joints are held 
                by six bolts. Sometimes these will have an Allen Key head, and 
                some have a 12-point star head. Make sure you use the correct 
                driver--you need a good connection to re-torque these when you have 
                finished. You may need to get a 12-point driver from a VW shop, 
                if you car has these (most other automotive shops carry them as 
                well). Under the bolts is a washer and a "paired" plate which 
                fits under two of the bolts (three plates for six bolts).
Remove the six bolts from each end of the CV drive shaft. The 
                drive shaft will then come free very easily, and each exposed 
                end of the CV joints is full of black grease so be warned! Lay 
                the shaft down for the moment, and clean off all grease inside 
                the dished CV attachment plate in both the gearbox and the stub 
                axle (you-ll be repacking these with fresh grease later).
Now to the stub axle. With both the brake drum and the CV/Drive 
                shaft removed, the axle can be driven out of the assembly towards 
                the gearbox. It's a slight interference fit, so don't beat on 
                the threaded end of the shaft with a bare hammer. Use a block 
                of wood or rubber mallet to drive the shaft out. If the gearbox-side 
                spacer ring comes out with the axle, that-s OK.
Remove the four bolts holding the cover plate in place in the 
                middle of the brake assembly. You don't have to remove the brake 
                shoes for this. They can stay in place so long as you take extra 
                care not to get grease on them. The cover plate will lever out 
                easily, exposing the roller bearing underneath, with a ring shaped 
                spacer on the outside of it. Remove the spacer, and you-ll see 
                the chambered outer circumference facing the gearbox. The inner 
                race and the roller cage will then pop out very easily, leaving 
                the outer race in the brake assembly. Inside that is the tube 
                spacer which separates (and positions) the two bearings. This 
                should still be surrounded by grease, and should be very easy 
                to remove with your fingers.
Now go to the gearbox side. There should be another ring shaped 
                spacer sitting inside the grease seal (or it might have come out 
                attached to the stub axle). This spacer has a chamfer on the inner 
                circumference, facing the gearbox.
It-s a good idea to place all these items on a rag etc in the 
                order they are assembled, so you don-t get confused putting them 
                back. Gently lever out the grease seal facing the gearbox with 
                a large screw driver or similar.
The ball bearing is one complete assembly. To remove it you 
                have to use a drift placed through the centre of the brake assembly 
                on to the outer race, which is held in the brake assembly by a circlip which must be removed first. Make 
                sure you don't hit the drift on to the ball cage or inner race. 
                All pressure should be applied to the outer race. Tap on 
                the drift and working your way around the bearing to work it out 
                of the housing. There are indents in the housing on each side 
                (fore and aft direction of the car) which can help here. This makes 
                it easier to get the drift on to the outer race.
Clean out all the old grease, and carefully examine the outer 
                race on the brake drum side. If it is shiny and unmarked, you 
                can leave it there, the bearing is in good condition. If it needs 
                to be removed, use the drift and a hammer from the gearbox side 
                of the hole, and drive it outwards.
Clean each component until they are completely free of grease 
                and you can examine the bearings for marking and wear. If in good 
                condition (bright and shiny) they can be reused. If the grease 
                seals are in good condition they can be reused too, or you can 
                replace them as a matter of caution.
Take a moment to clean all the bolts and washers too. Cleanliness 
                of all components before reassembly is most important.
~~~
Repacking and Reinstalling 
                the Bearings
Place the cleaned inner ball race in the palm of your hand, 
                and using your other hand, place lithium wheel bearing grease 
                in the races and work it through with your fingers. It's a very 
                messy job, but don't skimp it. The grease must be worked right 
                through the bearing until it-s oozing out the other side on to 
                your palm.
Gently tap the ball bearing back into its place on the gearbox 
                side of the brake assembly. Only tap the outer race, not the 
                cage or inner race. Install the grease seal.
now insert the inner ring spacer over the stub axle (with the 
                chamfer facing the gearbox so it mates with the chamfered join 
                between the shaft and the CV flange, and insert the shaft through 
                from the gearbox side (you have put the grease seal back in haven-t 
                you-)
Now slide the tube spacer back over the axle from the brake 
                drum side, and you should see a space between it and the hole 
                in the housing. This space needs to be completely filled with 
                grease (it acts like a reservoir) keeping the grease from running 
                out of the bearings. Using a finger dipped in the grease you can 
                work it into the space around the tube spacer, running your finger 
                round and round the end to work the grease deeper (if this whole 
                process doesn-t feel therapeutic, you should be getting someone 
                else to do the job!)
Now put the roller bearing cage in the palm of your hand and 
                work the grease through the bearing, as you did with the ball 
                bearing. Once completely packed with grease, place the cage over 
                the axle and push it home. If you-ve done it right, some excess 
                grease will push out between the rollers. If not, pull the bearing 
                and work more grease into the area, so when the bearing is push 
                home the space between the two bearings is FULL of grease.
Replace the outer ring spacer, with the chamfered edge facing 
                the gearbox (it-s chamfered on that side so it only bears on the 
                inner race, not on the roller cage). Insert a new grease seal 
                into the outer cover (or just completely clean the existing one 
                if you are reusing it), and place the cover back over the bearing 
                and spacer. Tighten the four bolts.
Replace the brake drum, and spin the 36mm nut on. Once the wheel 
                is back on the ground, you-ll be able to tighten it to 217 ft-lbs 
                and install the split pin.
~~~
Double Swing Plates
Someone wrote to ask -- We have a rear end out of an old VW but 
              it has two spring plates on each side. I have been looking for any 
              information I could find on this type so that I know what year trailing 
              arms to use. Can you tell us what years VW's used the two spring 
              plates and what year trailing arms to look for that will work with 
              this type of rear end.
Rob responded -- The Bugs with the Independent Rear Suspension 
              (IRS) used the double springplates on the rear suspension. These 
              are shorter than the single springplates to suit the different 
              brake hub assembly shape, which accomodates the diagonal link. Because 
              of the diagonal link which is fixed to the torsion bar tube near 
              the middle of the car, the actual torsion bar inside is mounted 
              further outboard, and so protrudes about two inches out through 
              the spring plate and the cover plate with the four bolts. On the 
              swing axle models the torsion bar does not project out past the 
              cover plate, so a quick look at the front end of the spring plates 
              for the projection or flush torsion bar cover will tell you if the 
              car has the twin springplates or not.
In the U.S., semi-automatic Bugs from '68 onwards had IRS, and 
              ALL Bugs from '69 onwards had it. In other parts of the world the 
              semi-automatics had it from '68 and the L or S superbugs had it 
              from '71 onwards. In some parts of the world the 1200cc base model 
              Bug continued to be sold with the swing axle suspension and single 
              spring plates.
~~~
Removing the Rear 
                Wheel Bearings on a Swing Axle Bug
The bearings sit on the outer ends of the axles and the inner race 
              has a slight interference fit with the splined section of the axle. 
              The outer race slips into the assembly in the end of the axle tube 
              which holds the spring plate and brake assembly. This is a close 
              fit but is "slip in". To remove the wheel bearing, there are two 
              methods.
The VW way is to use an "inside" puller which grabs the inside 
                of the bearing race, between the balls, and withdraw the complete 
                race that way. It's not a real tight fit in the end of the axle 
                tube. It's an easy job if you can find/make a suitable puller 
                -- you could try
Aircooled.Net
or someone like that.
If you don't have an inside puller, this second method will 
                work. It uses the axle tube as a "ram" to push the bearing off 
                the axle. You need to remove the complete axle tube assembly (including 
                the backing plate and hydraulic line, and release the rubber boot 
                at the inner end of the axle tube. There are spacing rings on 
                both sides of the bearing, so remove the outer one (its a firm 
                fit on the axle but you can (gently) use a screw driver as a wedge 
                between it and the bearing to get it moving off the shaft. I say 
                gently as there is also a thin metal washer between the spacer 
                ring and the bearing, and you don't want to damage it.
The axle itself is held in the gearbox by a large retaining 
                ring and circlip. Stand the axle tube assembly up with the brake 
                assembly upwards. Then using a large hammer, and using the shock 
                absorber lower mounting horn on the axle tube as a handle to hold 
                the axle tube steady, beat that fitting outwards, trying to force 
                it off the axle. It takes some doing, and you have to be careful 
                to hit the axle tube assembly squarely on the inner side so you 
                don't damage it, but eventually the axle tube, with bearing in 
                the end of it, will be forced outwards over the splined end of 
                the axle. Once you've moved it about an inch it will become easier 
                as the interference fit for the bearing is at the inner end of 
                the splines only.
To get access to the bearing you need to remove the brake drums, 
                and then the shoes. The slave cylinder and backing plate can stay 
                on, unless you have to remove the whole thing from the car as 
                described above, then you'll need to disconnect the brake lines 
                (and re-bleed them after re-assembly).
There are four bolts holding the bearing retaining plate in 
                place. Remove them and pull the plate clear. There is a paper 
                seal and an O-ring which will need replacing, and there should 
                be a larger spacer washer in there too. Take note of how everything 
                fits so you can re-assemble it the same way.
The retaining plate has an oil drip hole at the bottom, so any 
                leakage from the bearing will drip out through the backing plate 
                and not on to the brakes, and so you must place the plate the 
                right way round when reassembling. Make sure the O-ring is not 
                twisted. You'll get some smelly geabox oil on you with this job. 
                 The downward angle on the axle tube (positive camber) is designed 
                to hold a small pool of gearbox oil behind the bearing for lubrication. 
                If you can lift the side of the car high enough so the oil flows 
                back to the gearbox you'll reduce the mess a little.
When reaseembling with a new bearing, make sure the inner spacer 
                has the chamfered edge facing the gearbox, or you'll have to remove 
                the whole thing again to get it put back in the right way. These 
                spacer rings provide the positioning function for the bearing.
Putting a new bearing in is easier. Find a tube a little larger 
                than the axle splines, and use that to drive the new bearing home 
                over the splines.
Renew the oil seals (never try to re-use them) and make sure 
                the drain hole in the bearing retaining cap (with the four bolts) 
                is clear.
You can adjust the rear wheel bearing position a little using 
                the paper washer under the outer bearing retainer (with the four 
                bolts). A thinner paper washer will push the bearing inwards a 
                few thousandths (it allows the outer retaining plate to move towards 
                the gearbox), or if necessary, remove the paper washer all together 
                and use the thinnest layer of gasket goo you can.
- Rob Boardman
March 2002
~~~
Swing Axle vs Independent 
                Rear Suspension
Most people think that the Super and Standard are identical from 
              the dashboard rearward. This is not exactly true. All pre-1969 models, 
              except the 1968 Super Beetle with Automatic Stick Shift, are equipped 
              with swing axles at the rear. After 1969 both have independent rear 
              suspension. If ancient memory serves, yours will have an additional 
              link rod, which starts at the inner ends of the torsion bar housing 
              (near the front end of the gearbox), and runs out at about a 45-degree 
              angle (relative to the car's centreline) to the outer CV joint housing/brake 
              assembly. So on the swing axles, location of the axle comes from 
              the axle itself (location across the car) and the spring plate (location 
              along the car). On yours, the diagonal link provides location across 
              the car and the spring plate provides location along the car. If 
              that ancient memory serves, this is so the IRS axle can slide in/out 
              as it's two joints work up/down. My axle is of course rigid at the 
              outer end.
All '70 manual Beetles in Australia are swing axles. In the US, 
              '68 semi-autos got the first IRS and then all Beetles in '69. In 
              Australia, '68 semi-autos got IRS, then all Beetles in '71.
~~~
Conversion -- Swing 
                Axle to
Independent Rear Suspension
A question was posed regarding the whether the transmission from 
              a '73 Standard Beetle could be used in a '66 Bug and whether the 
              axle lengths are close enough without having to swap them out or 
              get them cut.
Rob wrote to say that he's never done this kind of swap, but it's 
              a fairly big job.
The '73 has IRS suspension, so to use the '73 transmission you'd 
              need to convert the '66 to IRS. The IRS transmission can't be used 
              with swing axles. This involves welding the diagonal strut supports 
              to the inner sides of the torsion bar tube, and using the '73 torsion 
              bars and fittings. It needs a proper jig to weld those supports 
              in straight, not a "home" job.
The '73 transmission will fit into the '64 Bug but you need the 
              later style cradle (between the horn ends) so you can use the later 
              rear mounts. I think the whole transmission nose cone might need 
              to be changed too (to the earlier one) the front mounts are different.
If only one of the cars is going to go on the road, an easier solution 
              might be to put the '66 body on the '73 floor pan.
If you had a '68 1500cc gearbox it would fit straight in, and give 
              you better gearing than the '66. The '66 1300cc used 0.98 4th and 
              4.375 final drive. The '68 swing axle 1500cc gearbox (also the '69 
              and '70 swing axles in Europe and Australia -- USA had IRS then) 
              has 0.98 4th and 4.125 final drive. The '73 box has 0.93 4th and 
              3.88 final drive.
'66 1300cc -- 3400 @ 60mph
'68 1500cc -- 3200 @ 60mph
'73 1600cc -- 3050 @ 60mph (all approx.)
~~~
A similar question came in -- I bought two IRS transaxles; I didn't 
              know if there was a difference about the swingaxle or IRS. All I 
              want to do is bolt the IRS up and take the swingaxle out.
Rob responded -- It is possible to convert the swing axles suspension 
              to IRS, but it's complicated because on the swing axle models the 
              axle itself is part of the wheel hub locating system, but on the 
              IRS there is an extra Z shaped support for the brake/hub assmembly. 
              This support is attached to the inboard sides of the torsion bar 
              tube, and this support must be carefully welded into position as 
              part of the conversion. The axles in the IRS suspesnion do not form 
              part of the wheel hub support. The axles "float" between two CV 
              joints.
So you can NOT just "bolt up an IRS suspension" it's much more 
              complicated than that.
~~~
Rear Suspension Alignment/Adjustment
Someone asked -- I have a sand rail and the rear tires drag and screech 
              down the road. The rear tires are running outwards when rolling 
              down the road not straight down the road. I have been told my trailing 
              arms might be bent, like it was slammed against a tree or curb. 
              Is there any way to fix this; that is, to "align" the rear suspension-
Rob responded -- There certainly is -- for toe-in/out anyway. The 
              track (toe-in/toe-out) is adjustable over a small range on the VW 
              rear suspension. The trailing arms are connected to the brake hub 
              assemblies on elongated bolt holes. The correct amount of toe out 
              (yes, toe OUT) is 0.5 degrees (about 1/8th inch difference at the wheel 
              rims front and rear side of the axle), so when the wheels are under 
              power the tyres tend to push the axles forwards and run parallel.The 
              spring plates have elongated holes in the rear end, so the brake 
              assemblies can be moved back/forward a small amount.
Note:
The spring plates are the flat metal pieces which 
              attach to the torsion bar at the front and the brake hub at the 
              back -- they are the "lever" which twists the torsion bar. They 
              are called spring plates as on the swing axles models they have 
              to twist (spring) as the wheels move through their arc of travel. 
              When the spring plates are badly out of adjustment the car LOOKS 
              like it's squatting at the rear.
There are three bolts (or is it four on the IRS suspension-) just in front 
              of the rear brake hub. Have a look at it when you have the engine 
              out. You could try laying a long straight edge along the rear 
              wheels and comparing with the outer edge of the running board. This might give you some indication of a misalignment. It won't 
              be much -- the elongated holes allow for only about 1/2 degree total 
              movement.
The correct alignment is about 1/8-inch toe OUT on the rear (and 
              about 1/8-inch toe in for the front). This is for radial tyres. 
              For the older cross plies -- it's 1/4-inch instead of 1/8-inch (both 
              ends).
The rears are under power, so trying to force the axles forward 
              into parallel alignment, and the front tyres only have rolling resistance, 
              which tries to push the wheel backwards into parallel. That's why 
              the toe-out at the rear and toe-in at the front.
Some front drive cars use toe-out at the front for exactly the 
              same reason. The power through those wheel tries to push them forward 
              into parallel alignment.
If the amount of adjustment is not enough to correct your problem then the most likely cause is the torsion bar tubes getting bent and allowing the trailing arms to move rearwards.  A really hard knock (like running hard over a large rock etc which either catches on the tubes themselves or causes a real shock at the front of the wheels) might be enough to bend the torsion bar tubes backwards.  If that's the case you might be able to see the misalignment by looking along the torsion bar tubes. They should of course be exactly at right angles with the centreline of the car.
That's a difficult job to correct and would probably need a specialist suspension place to correct it.
It's much less likely to be the trailing arms themselves.  You'd be able to see clearly if one or other side HAD been bent. They are straight flat plate arms, and in any case bending one of those would move the axle forwards, not backwards, so you'd have that side toe-in and the car would be crabbing down the road.
Someone wrote -- I've noticed that the right rear end was sitting a little 
              squat. I felt like I even noticed it while I was driving it.
Rob responded -- You certainly can feel it once it gets bad. The back end 
              feels a little squirly or wollowy.
Question continued -- Slowly and carefully, we pulled the spring 
              plate off the end of the torsion bar and rotated it counterclockwise 
              what I believe was one notch. In rotating it counterclockwise, we 
              dropped the rear (rear is rear of car) end of the spring plate closer 
              to the ground. That was all we did. Now after reading your procedure, 
              something tells me that we completed only half of the procedure. 
              It sounds like we should have pulled the spring plate along WITH 
              the torsion bar out, and the other end of the torsion bar which 
              would be somewhere around the middle of the car, which has less 
              or more splines, should have been rotated the opposite direction 
              one notch.
Rob -- The inner end has 40 splines and the outer 44, so one spline 
              down on the outer-only results in 8.1 degrees of spring plate movement 
              -- that's a LOT.
Question continued -- It gets you to a halfway point between the 
              two points that the first rotation will give you.
Rob -- Not half way, but you have the gist of it.
Continued -- If the first rotation between two notches will give 
              you one inch, but you need to be at only half an inch, you have 
              to rotate the thing the opposite way to get back to the half inch 
              point. The question I have is....how do you get the torsion bar 
              and the spring plate out a bit at the same time- I think that the 
              spring plate came off without pulling the torsion bar out at all.
Rob -That's normal. What I do is leave the rubber bush on, and 
              pull it just enough so I can get my fingers behind and grab the 
              torsion bar, then wiggle the whole thing and pull out the spring 
              plate, bush AND the torsion bar, and rotate the rear of the torsion 
              bar one notch on the inner spline -- that's about 6-8 inches at the 
              rear of the spring plate (I forget exactly, but it's 9 degrees exactly).
Then push the whole assembly back on to the inner spline, and then 
              pull the bushing etc off the outer end of the torsion bar and rotate 
              it back up one outer spline (8.1 degrees), which will result in 
              the rear of the spring plate now sitting just a little lower than 
              before -- maybe an inch.
If you do the whole procedure again you'll see that you can lower 
              the rear of the spring plate (which raises the car) by about 1-inch 
              per down-and-up rotation.
You are looking for an angle of about 21 degrees on the spring 
              plate (body level). This varies a little froom model to model, but 
              that angle gets you in the ball park.
If you have trouble with the "grab the torsion bar with your fingers" 
              method, then no problem. Just note the height of the rear of the 
              spring plate off the floor prior to removing it, then pull the spring 
              plate right off the torsion bar, grab the torsion bar by the outer 
              spline, pull it out a few inches and rotate it one spline "rearwards" 
              (top to the rear). You can mark the end of the bar with some white-out 
              etc to make sure you can see that it's rotated. You can actually 
              feel the spines "latch" if you are careful, so you can feel for 
              one notch only. Then reattach the spring plate so that the outer 
              end is only about an inch or so lower than before. If you get it 
              wrong, the spring plate will be either WAY too high or WAY too low 
              compared to the original height, so it's easy to tell if it's right.
Question -- Even if I can get the torsion bar out, how do you know 
              how many splines you have rotated since the other end of it is back 
              in the tube where you cannot see-
Rob -- You do it by feel, since on inner spline is 9-degree rotation 
              and it's easy enough to guess about 10 degrees, so you know when 
              you get it back in that it has to be right. Taking note of the height 
              of the rear of the spring plate for each movement helps too.
It's almost impossible to rotate is MORE than one notch up or down 
              at a time. The spring plate will be almost 45 degrees down with 
              two rotations on the inner spline by istelf (18 degrees plus it's 
              initial downwards angle).
In other words, as you do it it becomes "natural" if you keep an 
              eye on the height of the rear of the spring plate, and always do 
              "one down one up" as a complete rotation.
~~~
IRS Adjustment
Someone asked -- I have a 1972 VW Bug with IRS suspension. Working 
              down through your
Rear Suspension Adjustment
procedure, is there anything which is under tension and might spring 
              out- And how do the 14 steps of the procedure change with an IRS 
              suspension- I need to raise the rear 2" (yeah, it really sags, and 
              the muffler practically drags on every driveway I come to), how 
              many rotations do you estimate I need to make-
Rob -- When you lift the car the spring plates descend until they 
              sit on the stop-lip which is part of the assembly attached to the 
              torsion bar tube. This means they are still under a lot of tension 
              -- wanting to descend more. At the point where I describe jacking 
              up the spring plate, then pulling the plate outwards off the stop 
              lip is where you take a little care. If you just lever the plates 
              outwards at that point, they will spring straight downwards off 
              the stop lip with tremendous force (over 600-lb tension).
If the car is on jack stands, the back end of the spring plate 
              won't hit the floor or anything like that, but it's much better 
              to do the job with a jack and control it's descent. Then you have 
              control, rather than the car having control.
Nothing springs outwards towards you, and once the spring plate 
              has no tension, everything can be pulled free reasonably easily. 
              The large rubber bushes at the forward end of the spring plate do 
              restrict sideways (away from the car sideways) movement a little, 
              but not too bad. Use talcum powder as a lubricant if needed to 
              get the spring plates back over them.
The only part of the procedure which changes for IRS is that the 
              bolts holding the spring plate are forward of the axle, rather than 
              over and under the axle (the spring plate is a little shorter on 
              IRS models). You possibly may not have to loosen the hand brake 
              assembly on the IRS models, since the axle does not have to be pulled 
              clear so much to the rear. I haven't had to do this job on my '68 
              Bug (a converted semi-auto with IRS) yet, but you'll see the bolts 
              just forward of the brake assembly which attach the spring plate.
On the IRS models, the torsion bar actually projects right through 
              the cover over the torsion bar tubes near the front of the fender, 
               but the job doesn't change there at all (it does if you have to 
              REMOVE a torsion bar, but not with this job).
You'll probably need TWO "one up one down" rotations" to get that 
              much sag out. You have to do each rotation as a "one up one down" 
              complete, as the spring plate changes about 9 degrees with each 
              part of the movement (9 degrees down on the inner splines, then 
              8.1 degrees up on the outer splines to give a 0.9 degree lift to 
              the car), and the spring plate can't move much more than this -- 
              in other words you can't do 18 degrees down then 16.2 degree up 
              in one movement. Hope that makes sense. If you have the car level 
              on the jack stands, you are looking for a downward angle on the 
              spring plates of about 21 degrees. But if your complete car is a 
              lot lighter than the Beetle, that setting may not work. You may 
              need one rotation LESS than 21 degrees, as that setting suits the 
              1800-2000 lb weight of the normal Beetle.
Don't worry if the angle is slightly different on each side. Just 
              get them as close as you can. The torsion bars never sag at exactly 
              the same rate, so exactly matching them is not possible, but so 
              long as they are close, you can't see the difference from behind 
              the car.
Question -- My Bug was lowered in the rear so I raised it two splines 
              or three inches. The swing arm seems to rest in the middle of the 
              rear end plate and there seems to be the same distance from the 
              center of the axle to the bottom of the wheel well on both the front 
              and rear. What is the stock height of a '67-
Rob -- 20cm (around 7.8 inches), measured under the lip of the floor 
              where the line of body attachement bolts are fixed (the ride height 
              for all standard Beetles is the same). The bottom of the running 
              board should be the same height if it's attached correctly, so you 
              can use that as a quick check.
The floor should be level, so you can measure it under the front 
              of the door, and then again just in front of the rear wheel well 
              and get an idea if it's still sagging at the rear. It sound's like 
              you have it about right though.
Question -- Should the wheel well be a good measurement (are to 
              bottom to the wells parallel-).
Rob -- I'm not sure about that, but that bolt-line lip under the 
              floor should be level from front to rear.
~~~
Camber
Dave wrote, I seem to recall something a mechanic did for me on 
              my '65 Bug that he called a "Hunter alignment." The rear wheels 
              were pigeon-toed too far in at the bottom and were wearing out prematurely.
Rob -- That's camber your talking about now. Shouldn't be a problem 
              with the IRS suspension, since this keeps the wheel near vertical 
              all the time, unlike the swing axle cars which change camber all 
              the time.
You need to take the car to a wheel alignment place that connects 
              front and rear to align all four wheels -- they need to be done together 
              so the car doesn't end up crabbing sideways.
Question -- The way the car sits now, the right rear is raised slightly 
              higher than the left side, but not as much as the right rear was 
              sagging from the left side, so that leads me to believe that doing 
              the other half of the proceedure may just put it where it should 
              be, also bringing out the bottom of the tires a bit. I'm not sure 
              if positive camber is where the tires look like this \ /, or this 
              / \.
Rob -- Positive camber means the bottoms are in and the tops are 
              out (your first example).  Another way of thinking of it is that 
              the axles tubes should have a slight downward angle from gearbox 
              to brake drum, with the car sitting on the road. Actually about 
              2 degrees or so. This angle also ensures that some gearbox oil pools 
              behind the rear wheel bearings. That's how they are lubricated 
              on swing axles Beetles.
Question -- Before we attempted the procedure... | |, pretty much 
              straight up and down, but with the right rear sagging a bit. This 
              is what they look like now...\ /, with the right rear slightly raised 
              higher than the left side.
Rob -- That's the right way round -- now you just have to even them 
              up. It's impossible to get it absolutely even, since the torsion 
              bars always sag at fractionally different rates, but so long as 
              the ends of the spring plates are within about 1/2 inch in height, 
              then the car will look fairly even on the road. I would tend to 
              put the "high" side on the curb side of the car, if I had a choice, 
              as this will make the car sit a tiny bit flatter on the road.
Question -- The rear wheels have a slight positive camber now.
Rob -- That's how it should be. Besides the suspension geometry 
              then being right, it also ensures that a small pool of gearbox oil 
              remains behind the rear wheel bearings, so they don't ever run dry 
              (I've had my 1970 Beetle since new, and it still has it's original 
              rear wheel bearings after 248,000 miles). With a lowered rear end 
              (negative camber), those bearings will only get a splash of oil 
              in prolonged cornering, when any oil in the axle tubes is forced 
              outwards.
~~~
"Sagging" Rear End
Someone wrote -- As I look at the car sitting out there at the curb 
              in front of the house it looks too low in the rear to me.
Rob -- The simple test is to look at the car from the rear. If the 
              rear tyres are out at the bottom and in at the top, it's sagging. 
              The correct angle has a very slight positive camber bottom fractionally 
              in, top fractionally out. In fact on the swing axle models the book 
              says (from memory) the axles should have about a 2 degree downward 
              angle from gearbox to brake hub. This arrangement makes sure that 
              some gearbox oil is always sloshing about behind the rear wheel 
              bearing. That factor doesn't apply to the IRS course (open axles 
              and greased wheel bearings), but I think the axle angle is the same.
It's a very straightforward job; see the
Rear 
              Suspension Adjustment
procedure is on our site. The main assistance 
              tool is the trolley jack (for lifting the spring plates before prying 
              them outwards off the stops), and you have one of those. Some guys 
              talk about "levering them out and they spring down with a huge bang 
              that'll break your leg ...." but that's totally unnecessary with 
              a trolley jack to help.
Allow about four hours the first time you do it. Both sides should 
              be done at the same time or the car will be cocked up on one side 
              until you get to the second side.
The IRS wheels move vertically so they WON'T show the camber like 
              the swing axles do. You have to put a spirit level on the axle itself 
              -- it should have a slight downward angle from gearbox to wheel 
              about 2 degrees. Or put the spirit level on the bottom of the door 
              jam with the car on level ground, to see if the back is lower than 
              the front (though this test won't actually show much of an angle 
              unless the torasion bars are REALLY tired and the back suspension 
              feels mushy).
I don't know about your spirit levels, but ours have 4 lines on 
              the glass. It's level if the bubble is inside the inner lines, and 
              1 degree slope if the bubble is touching one of the outer lines. 
              Very useful measurement. One these levels, 2 degrees would have 
              the bubble about half way past the outer line.
Someone wrote -- I have a '73 convertible that has a pretty good 
              sag in the rear. I noticed that there are some sort of tube extensions 
              as part of the cover plates, and I was wondering what these are- 
              Is the adjustment to increase the tension on this '73, the same 
              as your text description-
Rob -- The extensions on the cover plate are used on all Bugs with 
              IRS suspension, since the diagonal brace mounts to the torsion bar 
              tube centre, where the inner splines would have been on the earlier 
              models. They just moved the bar outwards a bit, so they project 
              through the cover plate.
The procedure is exactly the same. But you'll note that the bolts 
              holding the spring plate to the brake assembly don't "cup" the axle 
              tube like they do on the swing axle model. The bolts are forward 
              of the axle itself might make it a little easier to remove them. 
              I don't think the brake assembly has to be pulled as far to the 
              rear to clear the spring plate end.
Make sure you clearly mark the position of the spring plate and 
              brake assembly so you can line them up afterwards, otherwise you'll 
              have the car crabbing with badly aligned rear wheels. The correct 
              alignment is between 0 and 0.5 degrees toe OUT if you do need to 
              get the rear wheels re-aligned.
You might have trouble re-attaching the cover plate. If you do, 
              find a couple of longer bolts to get the plate started, them replace 
              them with the correct length bolts once you've got two normal ones 
              on -- hope you follow that OK. Work at the bolts a couple of turns 
              at a time each so the plate doesn't get distorted.
~~~
Lowering Rear End 
                (e.g., for Sandrail)
Someone wrote -- I believe I have about an 1969 or 1970 volkwagen 
              that has been converted into a sandrail. My question to you is I 
              want to try and adjust the rear spring plates that come off the 
              torsion bar that run across the car. I need the car to sit lower 
              in the rear end so that the rear axle is more level to the rear 
              transmission housing, I am finding that the rubber boots that go 
              from the axle and wrap to the transmission housing seem to wear 
              very quickly and the of course I ave fluid leaks, secondly the weight 
              of the axle seem to rest on the horns of the car and has put stress 
              on them to the point where it has cracked them. I have read on your 
              web site (which has been extremely helpful in the past) on how to 
              accomplish this procedure, my question is how much tension is on 
              those springs and will a 2-ton trolley jack be enough to how the 
              tension- Next, are those springs going to come flying downward and 
              cause damage, and at what point will I know if it is safe to remove 
              the cover on the torsion bar, is the tension on the springs released 
              when I slowing let the jack down or is there is more tension on 
              the springs. Finally, how do I put more tension back on the springs 
              when I have adjusted the setting, since I am not working with a 
              lot of weight as the body of the car has been removed to be converted 
              to a sandrail-
Rob -- If you just lever the spring plate out off the stop lip then 
              they will let go with a huge bang that they will break your leg 
              or anything else which is under it. Each spring plate has about 
              600-700 lbs spring weight behind it.
So the trick is to jack it up and down with a trolley jack (a 2-ton 
              one is just fine) or a bottle jack so you can control the motion.
With a normal Beetle, the weight of the car as you jack up under 
              the rear end of the spring plate is enough to allow the spring plate 
              to lift off the stop lip. Then you can remove the cover plate bolts 
              and lever the plate outwards a few mm clear of the lip, and then 
              lower the jack. The spring plate should then rest at about a 20 
              degree down angle (assuming the floor of the car is level).
Lifting the plate is just the opposite. You jack it up just past 
              the stop lip and then tighten the four bolts on the torsion bar 
              cover plate to pull the spring plate back into place above the stop 
              lip. It's handy to have a couple of slightly longer bolts for the 
              cover plate for this job. The normal ones are only JUST long enough 
              to get the threads started (usually). Once you've pulled the cover 
              plate partly in with the longer bolts you put the normal ones in 
              the other holes then remove the long ones and replace them with 
              the normal ones. Hope that makes sense.
Since the sand rail is much lighter you might have to weight the 
              rear of the car somehow so the car will sit still whilst you jack 
              each spring plate up. Pehaps you can sit the car on axle stands 
              under the torsion bar tube and get a couple of mates to hop on top 
              of the rear of the car as you jack/release the spring plates-
With each spring plate at rest (approximately a 20-degree angle), 
              you then do the one-up-one-down rotation as described in the
rear 
              axle
article on our web site but do it in reverse so the spring 
              plate now sits at a lesser angle (19 degrees, 18 degrees etc).
Depending on the weight of the car over the rear axles you might 
              need to do the rotation thing two or even three times till the spring 
              plates no longer sit hard on the stop lip with the car at rest on 
              it's wheels. The spring plate should really only ever contact the 
              lower stop lip if the rear wheels come off the ground.
I'm guessing that you have a very harsh ride at the moment as the 
              springs will be set for a much heavier body.
Once you've got the ride height a little lower the axles should 
              be at a flatter angle and hopefully you won't wear out the rubber 
              axle boots so often.
~~~
"Floating" Rear End 
                on Ice
Question -- I have a '74 super Beetle and driving in icy conditions 
              the rear of the car feels like it is floating. I have driven Bugs 
              in the past and not noticed this behavier. Could it be something 
              in the front or rear suspension-
Rob -- I don't have any definitive answers, as I've never driven 
              on icy roads and rarely driven on snow (most areas of Australia 
              of free of snow and ice).
A couple of thoughts though...
Is the rear suspension sagging..is the bottom door sill level 
                with the ground or does the car sag a little in the rear. This 
                will make the car feel a little "soggy' and icey conditions might 
                make it more noticable. There is a "sagging rear suspension-" 
                article on our web site should you find this a problem.
Shock absorbers. If they are old and worn, this would show up 
                more on ice than on nice dry roads; the shocker's job is to smooth 
                and bumps and keep the wheel on the road surface as much as possible...if 
                they are worn they'll let the wheel bounce off the road/ice more 
                than necessary and with the already poor traction on ice this 
                would be more pronounced.
I guess it's also worth checking type pressures and tyre type. Hopefully suited to ice and snow.
~~~
Rear End Sway
Question -- When I drive at higher speeds or when the wind blows 
              it feels like the rear end is swaying. I know there are bushings 
              on the spring plates and on the trailing arm. Is there anything 
              else in the rear suspension that could cause the problem above- 
              Also when I wiggle the rear end by hand it seems to sway more than 
              it should and more than the '72 Beetle I also have.
Rob -- There are three main pivot points on each side of the superbug 
              suspension, and wear in any one of them might result in the symptoms 
              you describe.
There are the bushes in the spring plates (which you mentioned), 
              and there are bushes at both ends of the diagonal link (which looks 
              more like Z than a diagonal...running from the torsion bar tubes 
              to the brake hub assembly). These three buses and the three linking 
              components (spring plate, torsion bar tube and diagonal link) form 
              the positioning system for each rear wheel.
The only other possibility I can think of is the axle nut being 
              loose and allowing the two wheel bearings in the brake hub assembly 
              to move (the axle nut holds the whole stack of stub axle, bearing 
              races and spacers tight), or, just a faint possibility...that the 
              splines on the axles stub have worn and are allowing the brake drum 
              and wheel to move on the axle (this is unlikely to cause the symptoms 
              you describe).
The CV joints do not play any part in keeping the axle/wheel assembly 
              aligned, as they free float on the floating axle between the gearbox 
              and the brake drums assembly, so you can eliminate these from your 
              considerations.
* 
                * * * *
Design by
Erin