About Rob
A little about Rob...
Here's 
                    a picture of poor bent Bertie. The back of him looks worse, 
                    but fortunately the engine wasn't damaged. Here's a little 
                    VW poetry to aid his recovery.
I'm 
                  not a trained mechanic. I'm an old geezer - nearly as old as 
                  Dave :-)
I 
                  learned to drive in 1967 in my Dad's '60 beetle. My Dad later 
                  owned a '65 VW Camper too (1500ccs of unobtainable power!).
So 
                  when the chance came to buy a new car in January 1971, naturally 
                  I chose my own Beetle - a 1970 1500cc swing axle model, which 
                  cost me $2059 Australian.
I 
                  would have liked a blue one, but the choices were limited to 
                  black, red and beige - the Superbug was about to be released 
                  in Australia and stocks of the '70 model were running down, 
                  so I chose a Savannah Beige one instead (soon dubbed "
Bertie 
                  Beetle
"). Click here to read some
VW 
                  poetry
on Bertie
I 
                  still have it, and (I used to - see below) drive it every day 
                  to work. It now has over 248,000 miles on it's original engine 
                  (rebuilt, but still original). I like to do my own maintenance 
                  and have done so since the car was new. It is now looking rather 
                  unkempt (torn headliner, faded paint, a few rust spots), but 
                  it's hard to take it off the road for a restoration when I like 
                  to keep driving it!
My 
                  car has a character of it's own. It HATES driving in Sydney. 
                  On those occasions when I have to travel there, I have to tell 
                  it "I know you hate Sydney, but we will only be here a short 
                  time, and I'd hate to see you break down in front of all those 
                  cars who have to LIVE here" and it then behaves perfectly. If 
                  I forget to talk to it first, it ALWAYS starts sputtering and 
                  stalling at a particular set of lights on the outskirts of town. 
                  No kidding!
My 
                  wife (Sharon - like Dave's wife too) doesn't like it much (too 
                  small, too noisy), but indulges me in my 'other' passion (the 
                  VW). She does like having a manual gearbox though - our other 
                  car (a Ford Falcon Wagon) has a 'slush' box and all the character 
                  of a wet sponge. My youngest daughter, under the influence of 
                  Mum, says "Buggies are ugly aren't they" unless they have a 
                  flower holder on the dash (mine doesn't) -- then they are OK.
~ 
                  UPDATE
~
Bertie 
                  Beetle was badly damaged on 1 April 1999 when I was hit from 
                  behind by an inattentive driver. He pushed me (with locked brakes) 
                  into the car in front of me and so both ends were "shortened". 
                  Bertie is therefore undergoing a forced restoration, which will 
                  take me some time. At the time of the accident, my sister was 
                  selling an old bomb of a Chrysler, so I grabbed that for a set 
                  of wheels. Big 6 cylinder engine, automatic and ran on LPGas 
                  (which is 1/2 the price of petrol/gasoline in Australia).
But 
                  I missed driving a Beetle so much I just had to get another 
                  one whilst Bertie is up on blocks; and in early 2001 came across 
                  a very nice 1968 Beetle. He's a semi-auto which has been converted 
                  back to a manual (not all that hard to do), and has a '71 twin 
                  port 1600cc engine. He drives very nicely (once I got the leaking 
                  fuel, worn out carburettor, miswired headlights and badly adjusted 
                  clutch and brakes sorted out), so I'm a happy chappy again. 
                  My teenage daughter named him Bradley, after several attempts 
                  at totally inappropriate names - don't you just love teenagers!
The 
                  Bertie restoration isn't going anywhere at present. the kids 
                  are growing bigger and the bank balance is growing smaller. 
                  But he's not abandoned - just delayed.
Design by
Erin