Shock Absorbers
Shock Absorber Removal
and Installation
See also our
Shock Absorber
discussion.
~~~
Front Shock Absorbers -
Set the hand brake and block the rear wheels.
Loosen the front wheel lug bolts (nuts).
Raise the front of the car and place it securely on jack stands.
Remove the front wheels.  Stow the lug bolts (nuts) in a safe place.
1965 and Earlier Models (Kingpin Type Front End)
-
Remove the upper and lower shock mounting bolts and remove the shock.
Install the new shock absorber and replace the upper and lower shock mounting bolts.
1966 and Later Models (Balljoint Type Front End)
-
Place a floor jack under the torsion arm and raise the arm just enough to release tension from the torsion bar.
Remove the nut that attaches the shock absorber to the shock tower.
Note:
Use a "back-up" wrench (42mm - 1-5/8") on the buffer stud screwed into the end of the damper.  If you still can't loosen the upper nut, slide the plastic cover and rubber buffer down the shaft, grasp the lower end of the bugger stud with a pair of pliers, and, using an open-end wrench, screw the damper rod out of the buffer stud.
Remove the nut from the mounting pin on the lower torsion arm.
Remove the shock absorber.
If you are installing a new shock absorber, remove the bugger and buffer stud from the old shock and install them on the new shock.  If either part is worn, replace it.
If you're going to reuse t he old shock, inspect the upper and lower mounting bushings and, if necessary, replace them.
Inspect the mounting pin on the lower torsion arm.  Replace it if damaged.
Apply a light coat of multi-purpose grease to the mounting pin on the lower torsion arm.
Slide the lower end of the shock absorber onto the mounting pin and install the nut, but don't tighten it completely yetl
Install the damping ring (bushing) on the buffer stud with the shoulder facing up.
Extend the piston damper rod up and push it through the hole in the shock tower.  Install the second damping ring plate and the upper mounting nut.
Raise the floor jack until the shock bump stop is firmly pressing against the underside of the shock tower.  Tighten the upper and lower mounting nuts securely.
All Models
-
Lower the jack and remove it.
Install the wheels and tighten the wheel lug bolts (nuts) snugly.
Raise the car enough to free the jack stands, then remove them.  Lower the car to the floor.
Tighten the wheel lug bolts (nuts) to 72 ft-lbs for 5-bolt wheels, 90 ft-lbs for 4-bolt wheels.
~~~
Rear Shock Absorbers
-
Block the front wheels.
Loosen the rear wheel lug bolts (nuts).
Raise the rear of the car and place it securely on jack stands.
Remove the rear wheels.  Stow the lug bolts (nuts) in a safe place.
Remove the upper and lower shock absorber mounting nuts and bolts.
Remove the shock absorber.
Install the new shock absorber and replace the upper and lower shock absorber mounting nuts and bolts.
Install the wheels and tighten the wheel lug bolts (nuts) snugly.
Raise the car enough to free the jack stands, then remove them.  Lower the car to the floor.
Tighten the wheel lug bolts (nuts) to 72 ft-lbs for 5-bolt wheels, 90 ft-lbs for 4-bolt wheels.
* 
                    * * * *
Design by
Erin