Fan shroud Removal/Replacement
Fan Shroud Removal/Replacement
(Engine Removed from the Car)
~~~
Note:
This procedure applies to the doghouse fan shroud.
Fan Shroud Removal -
Remove the engine from the car in accordance with the
Engine 
                Removal Procedure
. The shroud CAN be removed with the engine 
                in the car (see the separate
procedure
for removal of the fan shroud with the engine in the car), but 
                the engine comes out so easily it's usually easier to remove engine 
                first. Working on the engine is so much easier when it's sitting 
                on the driveway or the workbench.
Disconnect the two sparkplug wire holders from either side of 
                the fan shroud.
Disconnect the wire to the coil from the distributor and any 
                other wires or hoses that might prevent you from lifting the fan 
                shroud straight up.
Remove the carburetor (the automatic choke interfers with the 
                removal of the alternator). Stuff a clean rag into the throat 
                of the carburetor and into the intake manifold to prevent foreign 
                material from getting inside.
Note:
We have used the word "alternator" in this article, 
                but the procedure works for older generator models, too. Not sure 
                if yours is an alternator or generator? Easy -- generators have 
                a constant diameter from one end to the other, whereas the later 
                alternator is "fatter" at the fan belt end than on the fan shroud 
                end.
Remove the tinware from around the rear (rear is rear) of the 
                engine.
Using a long thin screwdriver in the notch in the alternator 
                pulley to prevent the pulley from moving, and with a 19mm box-end 
                wrench (ring spanner), remove the nut in the center of the pulley. 
                Remove the alternator pulley outer half, then remove the fan belt.
Note:
Keep track of the number of spacer washers and 
                other bits and pieces so that the assembly can be put back together 
                just as it was taken apart. This is important -- you should always 
                have the same number of spacer washers in total, either between 
                the pulley halves or under the nut, otherwise the nut may not 
                snug down correctly, making the fan belt either too loose or too 
                tight. So don't lose any, okay?
Remove the fillister head (cheese head) screws that hold the 
                right air duct lower piece under the thermostat (there are screws 
                on the crankcase, the heater box, and the cylinder cover plates).
Unbolt the thermostat from its bracket and unscrew the thermostat 
                from the connecting rod. If the thermostat bracket is to be removed 
                from the side of the crankcase, scribe its location to simplify 
                adjustment of the thermostat when it is replaced.
Remove the oil cooler tin and the plenum that runs through the 
                firewall from the front of the fan shroud.
Disconnect the connecting link from the left side cooling flaps.
Loosen the bolt in the alternator mounting strap, then slide 
                the strap forward (towards the front of the car) and off of the 
                alternator support stand.
Remove the fillister head screw at each side of the fan shroud 
                (the screw on the left side also supports the metal fuel tube). 
                Then lift the fan shroud with the attached alternator straight 
                up unti it is clear of the oil cooler.
Throroughly clean the fan and the fan shroud, inside and out. 
                Painting the fan shroud adds a nice touch. You can use any color 
                you like on those engine parts that are NOT in contact with the 
                hot oil, but for those parts in contact with the engine oil, black 
                is the best color for shedding heat.
Doghouse Fan Shroud Installation -
Thoroughly clean the fan and the fan shroud, inside and out. 
                Again, painting will make the fan shroud look very nice.
Note:
You 
                can use any color you like on those engine parts that are NOT 
                in contact with the hot oil, but for those parts in contact with 
                the engine oil, black is the best color for shedding heat.
Install the alternator fan assembly into the fan shroud. Make 
                sure the four bolts that hold the outer fan cover to the shroud 
                are securely tightened.
Install the doghouse cover and the oil cooler vent (the vent 
                will go through the firewall tin.
Before attaching the thermostat connecting rod to the cooling 
                vanes, slip it down between cylinders #1 and #2 and make sure 
                it will move up and down without binding.
On the rear of the engine, reattach the thermostat connecting 
                rod to the right-side cooling vanes.
Carefully place the doghouse fan shroud down on top of the cylinder 
                cover tin, making sure that -
The thermostat connecting rod slides properly between cylinders 
                  #1 and #2 without binding;
The oil cooler is not damaged during installation of the fan 
                  shroud.
Note:
There are two engine tin screws on either side of the fan shroud, 
                down at the base, that hold the shroud in place. You may need 
                a flat-head screwdriver to pry open the cylinder tin slightly 
                to accommodate the shroud. (The shroud tin goes INSIDE of the 
                cylinder tin,
all the way around
.)
If you have removed the generator/alternator, place the two 
                cover plates back on and bolt them down with 10mm bolts (into 
                captive nuts on the other side). Use Loctite and lock washers, 
                as these bolts aren't something you want to lose inside the fan 
                shroud.
Note:
The fan shroud should fit tightly over the cylinder cover tin. 
                Screw it down on both ends of the shroud.
Slip the alternator strap around the alternator and alternator 
                pedestal tighten the 13mm nut.
Spin the fan and check for rubbing. You may need to level the 
                fan and alternator by adding a shim between the alternator pedestal 
                and the alternator or loosening the hold-down strap a bit. The 
                result will be a smooth spinning fan that can't rub on the shroud.
During the installation of the fan shroud, observe 
              the following points -
Take care to assure that the thermostat connecting rod makes 
                  its was down between the cylinders without binding. The rod 
                  passes through a slot in the air control plate between the right 
                  side cylinders. Make sure that these small flat plates are in 
                  place between the cylinders on both sides of the engine -- they 
                  are essential for directing air through the cylinder fins for 
                  maximum cooling efficiency.
Replace the cooling vane connecting link AFTER the fan shroud 
                  has been installed.
Replace the strap that holds the alternator to the alternator 
                stand.
Reinstall the fan pulley and the fan belt just as these components 
                were taken apart. Note the order of the various washers and especially 
                the number of shim washers. Make sure the small Woodruff key in 
                the shaft is replaced properly.
Following installation of the fan belt, check and adjust the 
                fan belt tension. The belt should deflect about 10mm when depressed 
                with your thumb. If necessary, remove the nut from the center 
                of the alternator pulley and separate the pulley halves. Any spare 
                shims are stored between the outer pulley half and the fas pressure 
                washer under the nut so they are available should you need to 
                replace the belt in the future.
* 
                * * * *
Design by
Erin