Starter
Starter Problems
~~~
Following are some common problems with the starter motor.
Loose mounting bolt(s).
A click from the solenoid when you're trying to start.
Slow cranking.
Won't start when hot.
A rriiiip sound as the starter spins.
No click, no start.
Loose mounting bolt(s).
First and foremost, make sure both of the mounting bolts are 
                tight. The upper one is also the top right engine mounting bolt. 
                It should have a square or half-moon head to prevent it from turning 
                when you are tightening the nut on the other side of the firewall. 
                If a PO has replaced this bolt with a hex-head one, you will probably 
                have a hard time keeping it from turning when you're tightening 
                it. Best plan -- get the proper bold and save yourself lots of 
                headaches (and bruised arms!).
This is very important - a note in the "Idiot Book" says, ""If 
                this bolt is loose your starter will stick." Voice of Experience 
                here can verify that's true!
A "Big Click" when you're attempting to start.
The electrical path for the solenoid is from battery in the back, 
                to the key and back to the solenoid - a long path with several 
                connectors on the way, so poor connections or a broken electrical 
                section of the key mechanism can cause this. The electrical section 
                for the key is replaceable. If you can short the heavy wire on 
                the starter to the thin wire connector with another length of 
                wire (this is what turning the key does) and the car starter works 
                OK, then it's probably in the key or the wiring to the key (car 
                in neutral and hand brake on HARD for this test - you have to 
                crawl under the car to get at the starter.)
I found that there are THREE spade connectors on the starter 
                solenoid. Two of them do indeed connect to the ignition switch; 
                the third is an extension of the large bolt to which the wire 
                from the battery connects. Naturally I had the wire from the ignition 
                switch connected to the wrong spade connector on the solenoid.
~~~
FIXING THE "BIG CLICK"
(The following is adapted with permission from Bob Hoover)
The CLICK itself is your main clue. It tells you power is getting 
                  to the solenoid. At that point the decision tree branches. Either 
                  the contact bar in the solenoid is worn or corroded or otherwise 
                  damaged so that it is not capable of doing its job (which is 
                  to connect the battery to the starter) or the solenoid isn't 
                  getting enough power to press the contact bar closed. There 
                  are some variations on this theme but they have different signatures. 
                  For example, CLICK! Whirrrr
 means the pinion isn't engaging 
                  the flywheel whereas CLICK! Groannn
 means the pinion is binding 
                  or the engine is seized or one of half a dozen other things.
The above should make it pretty clear that diagnosis is based 
                  on a complete understanding of how the system operates. It should 
                  also serve to illustrate that diagnosis reflects a decision 
                  tree.
Aside - If you'll examine the workshop manual for any 
                    modern vehicle you find it is largely devoted to depictions 
                    of the diagnostic decision tree in schematic format. You'll 
                    also see that virtually no space is given to telling you HOW 
                    to do the mechanical aspects of the repair. Instead, they 
                    tell you how to do the various diagnostic tests. When it comes 
                    down to R&R, the removal & repair (or replacement) of the 
                    component, the manuals assume you know how. Indeed, the WRENCHING 
                    is the easy part. The hard part is knowing what to wrench 
                    and you can only learn that by starting with the basics and 
                    working your way up.
The Big Click sez the problem is either in the solenoid or 
                  that insufficient power is getting to the solenoid. We can test 
                  for the latter by using a jumper cable from the battery lead 
                  to the spade lug on the solenoid, thereby eliminating about 
                  twenty feet of wiring and the possibility of a bad ignition 
                  switch. But let me tell you right now this is a very dangerous 
                  test. It should only be done when the vehicle is supported on 
                  jackstands. Why? Because the engine is liable to start. And 
                  if it does, it's liable to run over your ass.
So leave the key OFF. That will prevent power from going to 
                  the ignition circuit. Better yet, pull the HV lead out of the 
                  coil. Then do the test. If you don't know which lead goes to 
                  the battery, use your manual to figure it out. And if your solenoid 
                  is the later model with the two spade lugs, figure out which 
                  one goes to the ignition switch.
Make a jumper with a female spade-lug connector one one end 
                  and an alligator clip on the other. Detach the starter-switch 
                  lead from the solenoid and replace it with the female spade-lug 
                  on the jumper. To complete the circuit, TOUCH (do NOT clip) 
                  the alligator clip to the battery cable connector. Do NOT touch 
                  the copper stud nor the nut. The arc is enough to damage the 
                  threads of the stud and will bugger the nut when you try to 
                  remove it.
Note:
DON'T use that ohsokewl trick of shorting the 
                  terminals with a screwdriver! Yeah, it works. It also damages 
                  the terminals as well as the screwdriver.
IF the jumper test causes the starter to engage and to crank 
                  the engine, then the problem is in the wiring or the ignition 
                  switch, with the higher probability for the latter.
If the jumper test didn't help then you've narrowed the problem 
                  down to the solenoid. Fortunately, the fix is pretty simple. 
                  Start by removing the battery from the vehicle, then remove 
                  the starter, dismantle the solenoid and file the contactor and 
                  contacts smooth. You'll need to unsolder a couple of leads to 
                  dismantle the solenoid. Use a bit of Solder Wick to get the 
                  solder out of the holes. When you reassemble the solenoid be 
                  VERY SURE to use RTV or other WATERPROOF sealant.
Next time you go to replace the battery cable on the starter, 
                  you may discover that the threads on the solenoid are buggered 
                  all to hell; the nut won't come off (or it shears the copper 
                  stud). You can't get a die onto them, even if you had the proper 
                  die [which you don't] and you can't remove the old cable. You 
                  have to remove the entire starter and chase the damaged threads 
                  with a sixty-degree vee-file [see a set of Swiss pattern-maker's 
                  files]. That is, assuming the threads aren't buggered too badly. 
                  But if you've done that ohsokewl Idiot Trick more than a couple 
                  of times, forget it -- you'll have to buy a new solenoid. Swell 
                  idea, eh?
In the same vein, DON'T go pounding on the solenoid with a 
                  hammer. Yeah, this also works. And damages the solenoid in the 
                  process.
The usual reason for a solenoid to stick is due to rust on 
                  the plunger. The proper fix is to remove the starter, dismantle 
                  the solenoid and DEAL WITH THE RUST. If you just pound on the 
                  thing you might jar the plunger loose
 and you might not. The 
                  odds are about 50-50. And of course, you'll only hear about 
                  the successful tries.
~ Thanks, Bob! ~
~~~
Slow cranking.
Slow cranking is usually a sign that the battery is getting weak. 
                This could mean a sick battery or a generator/alternator not charging 
                properly. Please see our article on
Fault-Finding 
                the VW Electrical Charging System
; this should help you track 
                these faults if you have a voltmeter or multimeter.
The engine won't start when it's hot.
The engine not starting when it's hot (but you hear a click) 
                is usually caused by the throw-out solenoid getting sticky with 
                age and lack of lubrication. This solenoid forces the starter 
                gear on to the flywheel and also provides the main electrical 
                connection inside the starter motor. If it fails to start, but 
                a tap from a hammer on the solenoid results in it working again, 
                a sticking solenoid is most likely. (BUT - See Bob Hoover's note 
                above regarding hitting the solenoid with a hammer!) You can buy 
                new solenoids.
A rriiiip sound as the starter spins
but doesn't turn 
                  the engine.
this usually means stripped teeth on the flywheel which prevents 
                the starter gear from engaging. This is an engine-out fix - the 
                flywheel needs to be replaced (easy to do once the engine is out 
                of the car). This problem isn't common in VWs, but it can happen.
No click, or start -
but only sometimes... .
The electrical path for the solenoid is from battery in the back, 
                to the key and back to the solenoid - a long path with several 
                connectors on the way, so poor connections or a broken electrical 
                section of the key mechanism can cause this. The electrical section 
                for the key is replacable. If you can short the heavy wire on 
                the starter to the thin wire connector with another length of 
                wire (this is what turning the key does) and the car starter works 
                OK, then it's probably in the key or the wiring to the key. (car 
                in neutral and hand brake on HARD for this test - you have to 
                crawl under the car to get at the starter.)
The starter can be repaired by anyone handy with tools - there's nothing "special" about it.  The only part which needs an auto electrician is the spinning part itelf - if that is worn or has a broken coil section, it needs an auto electrician to fix it (but it's easily replaced as a whole component).
Someone wrote that he often had to hit the starter with a hammer to get it moving.  He removed the starter and found that it was filthy.
Rob wrote - A cleanout will certainly help.  Have a good look at the commutator section (the spinning copper segments) and the brushes - if these are dirty/pitted/worn then you need to have the commutator machined.  Do NOT try to clean it with sand paper etc - the right way is to get it machined and the plastic separators between the segments scraped lower so the brushes get good contact with the copper segments.
The throwout shaft should be clean but not lubricated or it will tend to gather dirt and stick.  If you can regrease the bearings (does it have ball bearings?) it will help keep the starter in good condition.
Dave Hall in the UK has a good article on his site for
Rebuilding Starters
(it's a Type 3 VW site, but the starters are the same).
* 
                    * * * *
Design by
Erin