Tune-up Procedures
;
;
;
;
;
;
Tune-up Procedures
(VW Type 1)
~~~
The Following Tune-up Steps
Are Covered in This Article -
Spark Plug Removal
Compression Test
Inspect, Adjust and Install Spark Plugs
Distributor (Cap, Rotor, Points, 
                      Condenser)
Check the Condenser
Adjust the Idle
Set the Timing
Preliminary Settings
Finding Top Dead Center
Making Your Timing Marks
Timing the Various Distributors
Timing With Stroboscopic Timing Light
009 and SVDA Distributors
Dual Vacuum Distributors
Static Timing
Idle/Timing Problems
Check the Coil
Bob Hoover's Wisdom Regarding the 
                        Coil
~~~
Step 1. Compression 
              Test.
Note:
The compression test should be done with 
                the engine cold.
The compresssion test is pretty much the same whether the press-in or screw-in tester is used (see pictures below).  Differences will be noted.
Screw-In Tester
Press-In Tester
Compression Testers
~~~
Carefully disconnect all of the spark plug wires from all four spark plugs. Number the spark plug wires to aid in proper reinstallation.
Note:
A handy trick is to wrap thin strands of copper wire around both ends of the spark plug wires--one loop for Cylinder #1, two loops for Cylinder #2, and so on. This way there is no question about which wire goes where. Refer to the diagram at the beginning of the Valve Adjustment procedure to see which cylinder is which and where the firing point for each is on the distributor.
Note:
To prevent damage to the spark plug wires, be sure to disconnect the wires by first twisting then pulling on the wire's boot, not on the wire itself.
Inspect the wires and the rubber seals on the ends. If they are worn or defective, replace them.
With the spark plug socket on the 3/8" ratchet, loosen all four plugs until they can be unscrewed by hand. Use the extension and socket to screw out the last few threads by hand, then remove the plugs.
Note:
I find that a 3-inch extension between the ratchet and spark plug socket is needed for cylinders #1 and #3.
Note regarding spark plug removal -
Someone wrote - My Bug's spark plugs are very tight.  When trying to loosen them, they squeak and creak.  I have not applied to much force for fear of stripping the head's threads.  Rob responded - I don't have any simple answers on this one - the best you can do is wait for a really cold night and remove the plug in the morning so the engine is as cold as it can be.  Steel expands and contracts more than aluminium, so the plug is likely to contract more than the head, making it easier to remove.  It's quite possible ithe plug has been cross-threaded when it was installed. If so, the thread will almost certainly be damaged when you remove it.  This is one reason why I always start the plug into the head with my fingers. If you can turn it in a turn or so just holding the threaded top then it will never cross thread.
Lay the spark plugs out in a pattern to match the way they came out of the engine. You will carefully inspect and gap the plugs in the next step.
Disable the ignition system by removing the high tension (coil) with from the distributor cap and connecting it to a known good ground to prevent spark discharge.
Screw the tester hose into the spark plug hole (hand tight only), or tightly hold the rubber end of the tester in the spark plug hole.
Note:
If you are using the press-in type of tester, you will need an assistant to turn the engine over.  With the screw-in type, you can screw the tester into each spark plug holder successively and turn the engine over yourself.
Caution:
If you're using the screw-in tester, do
not
use the long-reach adapter on short-reach holes (1/2" long spark plug threads).  If the long-reach adapter is used in short-reach holes, it may hit the top of the piston and damage the engine.
Turn the engine over six to eight times (same for each cylinder) and record the compression for each cylinder.
Note:
The test results should be over 100 pounds and within about five pounds of each other.  Low readings indicate need for an engine overhaul.
Try doing the test again on any cylinders that were low and note the pressure carefully.
Diagnosis
On a normal cylinder, compression should increase quickly and uniformly during each compression stroke of the engine until a top (or peak) reading is reached.
If compression is low on the first stroke, builds up on the following strokes, but does not reach normal value, the piston rings may be worn or leaking.
If compression is low on the first stroke and does not increase on following strokes, leaking valves may be at fault.
If the compression value is higher than the manufacturer's specifications, carbon build-up may be present in the cylinder or on  the piston.
If compression readings on two adjacent cylinders are 20 pounds (or more) lower than the other cylinders, the cylinder head bolts may be loose (cylinder heads leaking).
Recheck cylinders with low compression readings by injecting approximately 10cc of engine oil into each cylinder (through the spark plug hole (and retesting).  If the compression reading increases a little, the problem is probably worn, broken, or poorly seated piston rings. If the compression reading remains the same, leaking or damaged valves may be at fault.
Note:
The point of this test is to seal the rings momentarily to increase the compression. The oil helps      seal worn rings a little, but it does NOT help burned/tight valves or leaking heads - so this simple test can sometimes       tell you where the problem lies. What actually happens is that the rings wear on the outside where they scrape the cylinder,  so they get thinner, creating a larger gap at the back of the ring-groove in the cylinder, plus the gap in the rings grows    wider. The oil won't do much with the actual gap in the rings, but it helps fill in the extra space behind the rings in the 
ring grooves, and seals the contact between the rings and the groove itself -- the bottom of the groove and bottom of the     ring particularly as the piston moves up for the compression test.
Before re-installation of the spark plugs, proceed to Step #2 below, "Inspect, Adjust and Install Spark Plugs."
~~~
Step 2. Inspect, Adjust 
              and Install Spark Plugs.
Note:
See Rob's excellent article on
Reading 
              Spark Plugs
, which includes a link to some excellent
spark 
              plug pictures
). Also, credit must be given to John Connolly 
              at
Aircooled.Net
, 
              who gave us a lot of very helpful hints that you will find in the 
              following.
Note:
Always remove the spark plugs with the engine cold. 
              When hot the hole swells inwards and the plug swells outwards, resulting 
              in a tight plug thread and the risk of galling the threads. Bob 
              Hoover has strong feelings about this -- (Removing the plugs with 
              the engine cold) "is the standard rule for aluminum heads, and has 
              been since the 1920's. The world is filled with engines having aluminum 
              heads, but about the only folks who seem to have trouble with stripped 
              spark plug holes are kids with Volkswagens. I wonder why that is..."
Things you will need:
Two 13/16-inch spark plug sockets - one with a rubber insert 
                to hold the plug, and one without.
A ratchet (3/8-inch drive).
A 3-inch extension, 3/8-inch drive.
A universal, 3/8-inch drive.
A 6-inch length of rubber breather hose, 1/2-inch ID.
Pull the spark plug connectors off all four spark plugs (if 
                you have not done so already for the compression test.
Inspect the wires and the rubber seals on the ends. If they 
                are worn, torn, or otherwise defective, replace them.
Note:
The large rubber seals around the spark 
                plug leads are important -- they seal the spark plug holes in 
                the tin and assure that cooling air is directed to the heads rather 
                than going into the engine compartment. The seals MUST be replaced 
                if they won't stay snuggly against the hole in the tinware.
Stow the wires so you'll know what goes where (see the note 
                above under Compression Test).
Using the 3/8-inch ratchet, the spark plug socket with the rubber 
                insert, and the 3-inch extension (if necessary), loosen all four 
                plugs until they're hand tight using the spark plug socket on 
                a 3/8" drive ratchet (and appropriate extension if needed). Use 
                the extension and socket to screw out the last few threads by 
                hand.
Note:
If you have difficulty getting the socket 
                onto the spark plug, it's usually because the tin doesn't line 
                up with the plug, or there is something (e.g., the intake manifold 
                on dual-port engines) in the way. A small mirror may be helpful 
                to see interferences around the spark plug.
Lay the spark plugs out in a pattern to match the way they came 
                out of the engine.
If you are going to reuse the plugs, inspect them carefully, 
                comparing them to the
Reading 
                Spark Plug
pictures. Put the plugs back into the cylinder 
                they came from. If necessary, clean the plugs or install new ones.
Set the gap between the bottom bent electrode and the center 
                straight electrode to 0.028" using the feeler gauge on the gapping 
                tool. The bent electrode can be carefully bent in and out with 
                the gapping tool to make the adjustment.
Note:
The spark plug gap increases as the plugs wear. 
                John Connolly at
Aircooled.Net
likes to start with a new plug gap of 0.025". After 10,000 miles 
                that gap of 0.025" will be closer to 0.040". It is better to run 
                the plugs toward optimum then away from it.
Before installing the new plugs, make sure to remove the screw 
                cap from the top of the spark plug, and make sure that there is 
                a gasket on each plug.
Note:
Bob Hoover advises - Be darn sure to use a dab 
                of anti-sieze on the threads of the plugs and make sure that the 
                compression washer is in place. Install the plugs BY HAND until 
                the thread is full depth. Don't put a wrench on the plugs until 
                they are fully threaded into their bores. And if you can't thread 
                them in by hand, you've got galled threads and need to do something 
                about it -- it ain't gonna heal itself.
Rob's advice is just the opposite. He says - Never use "never-seize" 
                or other compounds on the spark plug threads. The higher head 
                temperatures in VW engines (20-40C higher than water cooled engines) 
                can cause these to "cook," resulting conductivity problems. So 
                long as you remove and install plugs when the engine is cold you 
                won't have a problem with seizing, and you'll also avoid stripping 
                plug threads. Hot heads make the threads very tight on the plugs, 
                so let the engine cool before removing them.
It's up to you.
Slip the 6" rubber breather hose onto the WIRE end of the plug.
Note:
The rubber hose is used here so you won't 
                drop the plug somewhere you don't want it (like inside the tin. 
                Ideally the hose will grip the plug, but you will still be able 
                to turn the plug.
Using the hose as a "socket" extension, hand-thread the plug 
                into its hole. Do your best to flex the hose as necessary so the 
                plug aligns properly with the plug threads.
Note:
The plugs should start in the holes and turn 
                fairly easily by hand. But please note - The cylinder heads are 
                soft aluminum, so be careful you don't cross thread the plugs 
                when screwing them in. Always start the thread by hand for a turn 
                or two so you can tell if it's cross threaded before any damage 
                occurs (there's just enough room to hold the threaded top of the 
                plug in the hole in the tinware). This is one reason why it is 
                wise to use a rubber hose on the plug - if the plug does cross 
                thread, the hose will slip and it won't hurt anything.
Once you are confident that the plug is started well in the 
                hole (you can feel it), pull the hose off, put on the ratchet 
                and socket WITHOUT the rubber insert (and the 3-inch extension 
                and universal as necessary). Torque the plugs to 22 ft-lb with 
                the engine no more than warm. Never over tighten the plugs -- 
                a snug-and-a-tug should do it.
Note:
You do not use the socket with the rubber insert 
                to tighten the spark plug, as the spark plug may be quite tight 
                in the socket, and removing the socket from the spark plug difficult. 
                Some people apply some silicone grease onto the plug before putting 
                it in the socket; this will make removal of the socket much easier. 
                Just be sure to wipe the grease off the end of the plug before 
                installing the spark plug wire.
Put the plug wires on the same way you took them off. Make sure 
                the rubber seals are pushed down firmly on the spark plugs and 
                that the seal is seated properly in the hole in the tin.
~~~
Step 3. Distributor (Cap, Rotor, Points, Condenser)
Note:
Ignition adjusting must be done on a cold 
              engine. You will start with the engine cold, and end with it warm.
Quoting John Muir -- Open the rear boot. Get out the stool and 
                sit down. Contemplate the air-cooled beauty before you.
- How to Keep Your Volkswagen Alive -- Step-By-Step Procedures 
                    for the Compleat Idiot.
Inspect the distributor/carburetor connections (if any).
Note:
If the distributor on your car is a double-vacuum 
                advance type, there should be two vacuum hoses from it to the 
                carburetor. The advance vacuum hose comes from the left side of 
                the carburetor right below the stepped cam. It connects to the 
                rear (rear of the car) port on the silver vacuum chamber on the 
                side of the distributor. The retard vacuum hose comes from the 
                rear port on the carburetor, just to the right of the throttle 
                lever. It connects to the port on the front and bottom of the 
                vacuum chamber on the distributor. It is essential that these 
                vacuum hoses be hooked up correctly; the car will run VERY poorly 
                (if at all) if they are reversed.
If you have a single-vacuum dual-advance distributor (SVDA - the best match 
                for the 34PICT/3 carburetor), there will be only one vacuum hose 
                connected to the port on the left side of the carburetor. The 
                vacuum hose as well as the ports on the rear of the carburetor 
                and on the intake manifold MUST be plugged to prevent air from 
                being sucked into the carburetor when timing the distributor.
Dave noted that it made no difference in the timing whether the 
                vacuum line was attached or unattached and plugged. Rob helped 
                him understand the situation better -
The vacuum line should not be working at idle, so the "remove 
                  and plug" routine is just insurance. If the idle set too high, 
                  though, it certainly CAN be noticed. The vacuum part should 
                  work almost instantly if you blip the throttle at idle (giving 
                  maybe 8-10 degrees more than the idle setting) and the centrifugal 
                  part should start to work (as you slowly increase the throttle) 
                  at about 1200 rpm, and should be all (about 32 degrees) in by 
                  about 2500 rpm. The vacuum is still additional to that so the 
                  throttle cruising at 45-50 mph (2500-2600 rpm) should result 
                  in about 40 degrees of advance.
BUT - Given all of that, Dave later discovered that the left-hand port on the carburetor was providing no vacuum at all.  Dave tried to remove a clog with a thin wire but to no avail.  He ended up replacing this Pierburg with a rebuilt, rebushed carburetor from (Keith Doncaster - keifernet@hotmail.com).  Keith rebushes and refurbishes carburetors for a very reasonable cost.
Pry the two spring clips off the distributor cap with the screwdriver. 
                Inspect the cap for cracks and excessive pitting on the contacts. 
                If defective, replace it. If okay, store it out of the way.
Note:
Find the small notch on the rim of the distributor 
                body. It should be either at about 5 o'clock for vacuum distributors (e.g., SVDA) or 7 o'clock for centrifugal-advance distributors (e.g. 009). When the 
                rotor is at this position, the #1 spark plug fires. The rotor 
                turns clockwise; the firing order is 1-4-3-2. It is a good idea 
                to mark the ends of the spark plug wires in some way so you know 
                which is which.
Pull off the rotor and inspect it. If the contacts are excessively 
                pitted or worn, replace it.
Note:
If you have an
Ohm Meter
, 
                touch one lead to the center of the rotor and the other to the 
                tip. Resistance should not exceed 10,000 ohms.
Another Note:
A reader provided the following interesting 
                tip: When you need to clean up the end of a rotor arm, drag it 
                over a tire. Sounds odd, but there's just enough abrasion to clean 
                it up perfectly, with no risk of damage due to over enthusiasm 
                .
If the rotor is okay, store it away in a safe place.
;
Breaker Points 
                  in the Distributor
~~~
With the rotor off, take a look in the center of the spindle 
                it rides on. If your distributor has a felt pad in there, put 
                a few drops of oil on it (engine oil is fine) to lubricate the 
                distributor drive. Don't overdo it though -- a few drops only. 
                Some distributors don't have this felt pad - in that case skip 
                this step.
To see how the points work, first make sure the transmission 
                is in neutral. Then put the 19mm socket on the alternator nut 
                and rotate the engine clockwise, the way it runs. Watch the points 
                open and close as you turn the engine. The points are adjusted 
                to 0.016" (50
o
on the dwell meter) at the point where 
                they are separated the widest.
Inspect the points and the nylon rider on the moveable point. 
                If they are excessively pitted or the nylon rider is badly worn, 
                replace them. Always replace the condenser at the same time you 
                replace the points.
Note:
That's one school of thought. Another one says, 
                "If it ain't broke, don't fix it!" In other words, if the condenser 
                is working, leave it alone. Your choice.
Note:
If the points are only slightly burned/pitted, 
                they can be touched up in the car using a small flat "points file", 
                which is about the size of a fingernail file. The points themselves 
                are very hard material, and will wear the file surface blunt, 
                so the tip of the file can be broken off with pliers once it has 
                been used, then next time you are using a new part of the file 
                surface. If the points need filing, adjust the gap afterwards.
If the points are okay, check the gap. The points are adjusted 
                to .016 inches (0.4 mm).
;
Points Being 
                  Adjusted
~~~
If necessary, adjust the point gap by loosening the hold-down 
                screw and moving the stationary point by prying the slot in the 
                point mechanism with a screwdriver. (The hold-down screw must 
                be loose enough to allow movement of the point but tight enough 
                to hold the point in place when you change its position.)
Note:
The adjustment device consists of (1) a notch 
                in the end of the point assembly and (2) a little bump on the 
                distributor plate. You adjust the point gap by prying the notch 
                against the bump with a screwdriver.
Check the point setting with the dwell-tachometer as follows:
Brighten up the sparking end of the rotor (if you're not replacing 
                  it) using emery paper (a file will remove too much material). 
                  Put the rotor back on the shaft.
Brighten up the four contacts inside the distributor cap if 
                  they look a little burned.
Replace the distributor cap, checking the spark plug and coil 
                  wires to make sure none of them have come loose.
;
Dwell-Tachometer
~~~
Connect the green clip from the dwell-tachometer to Terminal 
                  #1 on the ignition coil (the one to which the green wire from 
                  the distributor is attached -- it's on the left). Connect the 
                  black clip to ground (one of the bolts that holds the coil to 
                  the fan housing is a good place. Make sure the dwell-tachometer 
                  wires don't become tangled with the fan belt!).
Start the engine and allow it to warm up. Turn the Function 
                  Selector on the dwell-tachometer to DWELL; observe the reading 
                  on the Dwell Scale. (If your dwell-tachometer doesn't have a 
                  4-cylinder scale, note the reading on the 8-cylinder scale and 
                  multiply it x 2).
The correct reading is 50
o
+/- 2
o
(25
o
+/- 1
o
on the 8 cylinder scale). If too high, the 
                  point gap is too narrow. If too low, the point gap is too wide.
Readjust the point gap as necessary.
Note:
Changing the point gap changes the timing. 
                  If you change the gap, be sure to check the timing per Step 
                  6 below.
~~~
Step 4. Check the Condenser.
Remove distributor cap.
Turn crankshaft until the points are fully open (any cylinder).
Disconnect the green wire from the distributor to the coil.
Connect a test lamp wire to the ignition coil terminal and the 
                other lead to the distributor wire.
Switch on the ignition but do not start the car. If the lamp 
                lights, the condenser is grounded internally and must be replaced.
Reconnect the green distributor wire to the coil.
Pull the main high tension wire from the coil, and with the 
                ignition on, turn the engine over. The spark should jump a 1/4 
                inch gap to ground. If it won't jump this distance, replace the 
                condensor.
~~~
Step 5. Adjust the 
              Idle.
These instructions are for the 34PICT/3 Carburetor.
Note:
When troubleshooting the engine, eliminate all other possible trouble sources before you touch the carburetor adjustments.  Adjusting  the idle rpm should be the last step in a tune-up.  Otherwise, valve and ignition adjustments will upset the previously-made idle adjustment.
Note:
The idle and timing are interrelated and 
                must be set at the same time. See the
Timing 
                Procedure
below.
Note:
The idle adjustment must be made when 
                the engine is warm, the points are properly adjusted, and the 
                engine is timed.
Set the parking brake firmly and block the wheels. Put the transmission 
                in neutral.
Set the switch on the dwell-tachmeter to RPM (see the picture of the dwell-tachometer above).
Connect the green clip to the negative (-) terminal on the coil (the one to which the 
                green wire from the distributor is attached).
Note:
If you have a Capacitive Discharge Ignition (CDI) 
                system installed on your car, hopefully you provided a test lead 
                to which the dwell-tachometer can be attached. See the
CDI 
                wiring diagram
.
Connect the black clip to ground (again, the bolt that attaches 
                the coil to the fan shroud is a good place).
If you have a single-vacuum dual advance (SVDA) distributor, 
                remove the vacuum hose from the distributor and plug it to prevent 
                air from being sucked into the carburetor. Also remove and plug 
                the vacuum hose to the aircleaner to prevent air from being sucked 
                into the intake manifold.  (Regarding removal of  the vacuum hose, see the following note.
Note:
If you have a single vacuum distributor, 
                when you adjust the timing later you will remove the vacuum line 
                from the vacuum canister on the distributor and plug it to prevent 
                air from entering the carburetor. When you set the idle speed, 
                it
shouldn't
make any difference whether the vacuum line 
                is removed or not, since at the lower idle speed the airflow through 
                the main throat is very small. But if the idle speed is up a little 
                the vacuum line WILL see a vacuum signal, and this will affect 
                the advance. So the safe bet is to remove and plug the vacuum 
                line and set the idle speed with it off - that way you are sure 
                that you are only dealing with the centrifugal advance. The vacuum 
                advance does not begin to work until about 1200 rpm (so it shouldn't 
                affect the idle speed at all of course).
Start the engine and run it for at least five minutes to warm 
                up.
Allow the engine to idle. Remove the aircleaner and make sure 
                that the automatic choke is fully open (it's the butterfly valve 
                in the top of the carburetor -- with the engine warm the valve 
                should be standing straight up) and the stepped throttle (fast 
                idle) cam on the left side of the carburetor is all the way up 
                so that the screw on the top of the throttle arm is resting on the lowest 
                point on the cam.
Note:
The idle is set with a "Volume Control" screw 
                and a "Bypass" screw of the left side of the carburetor. The Volume 
                Control screw is the lower one and is the smaller of the two. 
                Both are recessed into the carburetor and must be accessed from 
                the side with a screwdriver. The Bypass screw (the larger one) 
                is used to adjust the idle speed. The Volume screw is the idle mixture setting.
Note the rpm on the tachometer; you will adjust it to 850 - 
                900 rpm (the specification given in the book) as follows:
Adjust the screw on the top of throttle lever so that it just 
                  touches the fast idle cam. Then turn it in 1/4 turn.
Note:
This step is very important. It opens the throttle 
                  butterfly in the carburetor 0.004" so that the idle jet will 
                  work properly.
Also Note:
In the
exploded view
of the carburetor, this screw is called the "Idle Control screw." 
                  This is misleading, as this screw is NOT used to set the idle 
                  as it was on earlier carburetors. The Volume Control and Bypass 
                  screws on the left side of the carburetor are used to set the 
                  idle speed.
Turn off the engine momentarily.
Slowly turn in the Volume Control screw until it bottoms lightly. 
                  Then back it out 2-1/2 to 3 turns. This is the
starting point
for this screw.
Note:
The Bentley Manual says, "Do not adjust the mixture by turning the Volume Control screw unless (1)you have installed a different carburetor, (2) you have removed, repaired, or rebuilt the carburetor, or (3) the engine is producting excessive emissions."  This adjustment is critical - use a flashlight and make sure you have a good line of sight.  The Volume Control screw out of whack can cause exasperating performance problems.
Restart the engine and adjust the Bypass Screw until you obtain 
                  the desired idle speed (850 - 900 rpm) as indicated on the dwell-tachometer. 
                  Turning the bypass screw out increases the rpm; turning it in 
                  decreases the rpm.
Turn the Volume Control screw one way or the other to obtain 
                  the highest idle speed, then turn the screw clockwise (in) until 
                  the engine speed drops by about 25 rpm.
Note:
This step is a little tough--it's hard to see 
                  a 25 rpm difference on the tachometer, especially if you're 
                  using a tachometer designed for an 8-cylinder car. Do the best 
                  you can.
Reset the idle to 850 - 900 rpm using the Bypass Screw.
Note:
If you have trouble setting the idle speed 
              with the timing correctly set (see the next step), go to the section 
              below regarding the
Idle/Timing Interrelationship
.
~~~
Step 6. Set the Timing.
Please see also our
Timing 
                Discussion
.
IMPORTANT NOTE:
It is important to understand the four-stroke design of the aircooled Volkswagen engine (intake, compression, combustion and exhaust), both when adjusting the valves and setting the ignition timing.  As you turn the crankshaft through its complete four-stroke cycle you will note that you turn the alternator pulley around TWICE.  You will encounter TDC at Cylinder #1 and again at Cylinder #3.  To time the spart properly, you MUST make sure that it is Cylinder #1 at TDC and not Cylinder #3 (voice of experience!).  If you are at all unsure, run our
Finding Top Dead Center
procedure below.
Note:
This procedure gives the timing specifications 
                for both the vacuum-advance (single and dual) and centrifugal-advance 
                (009) distributors, as all three are used with the 34PICT/3 carburetor. 
                The timing is correct (at idle) when the spark leaves the distributor 
                exactly when the correct timing mark on the crankshaft pulley 
                lines up with the crack in the crankcase.
~~~
Preliminary Settings -
First make sure the valves, the point gap and the idle are 
                  properly set. Changes in point gap and idle speed change the 
                  timing.
~~~
Find Top Dead Center (TDC) -
If you are uncertain as to which mark is which on the crankshaft pulley, you must find the point at which piston #1 is at Top Dead Center on its compression stroke.  A “quick and dirty” method is the “pencil/straw test;” a better and more definitive way is to check the position of the #1 valves.  First, the “pencil/straw test.”
Find TDC with the “pencil/straw test.”
Remove the #1 spark plug.
Note:
The #1 cylinder is on the right side, closest to the front of the car.
Remove the distributor cap and find the small notch on the rim of the distributor body that marks the position of the #1 spark plug wire (5 o'clock for SVDA distributors; 7 o'clock for 009 distributors).
Note:
This is a very thin little notch in the metal - it's easiest to find if you run your fingernail around the rim of the distributor body.
With a 19mm socket or 19mm box-end wrench (ring spanner) on the alternator nut, rotate the engine (clockwise -- the way it goes) until the rotor is approaching the #1 spark plug position (the notch you found in the rim of the distributor). This will place the piston near the top of its stroke.
Insert a pencil (eraser end first) or straw into the #1 spark plug hole until it rests on the top of the piston.
Note:
Make sure that the pencil/straw is horizontal, not lying at an angle across the cylinder. If you're not careful, you make break off the end of the pencil, which will then fall down into the cylinder! Not good!
With the 19mm wrench (spanner) on the alternator nut, and while holding the pencil/straw on the top of the piston, move the crankshaft back and forth across the #1 spark plug position until you find the point at which the piston is highest in the cylinder (i.e., the pencil/straw is at its furthest point out of the spark plug hole). This is Top Dead Center.  There will be a few degrees of crank movement where the pencil/straw is not moving - you want the middle of this crank movement.
Note:
It is important to get the piston roughly at TDC (TDC mark near the split in the crankcase -- Step c. above). Then place the pencil/straw in the hole and rock the piston back and forth to find the center of the no-movement position. If you put the pencil/straw in with the piston at or near BOTTOM of its stroke, and place it so that it is sitting at an angle across the cylinder (the spark plug hole is on the upper side of the head), then rotate the crankshaft, the piston may push the pencil sideways break off the end. Removal of this end bit of the pencil is
expensive!
That's why the straw is suggested as an alternative - it is stiff enough for the test but bendy enough not to break off inside the cylinder.
Find TDC by checking the position of the #1 valves.
To do this you must remove the rocker cover on the right-hand side to expose the valves.
Note:
Dave finds it easiest to raise the rear of the car and place it securely on jack stands, then remove the right-rear wheel.  Rob says - "Putting it on jack stands would make the job a tad easier I guess, but I just lie on the ground under the right side of the engine and pop the rocker cover off – you can get at the valves easy enough to wriggle them with the car still on it's wheels.
First rotate the crankshaft so that the timing marks are at the top of the pulley.
By looking at the valve springs, note the position of the valves on the #1 cylinder (the outer valves are the exhaust valves and inner ones are the inlet valves).
Rocker Arm Assembly
Note:
Since on the firing stroke both valves must be shut, two loose springs/tappets for #1 with the timing marks at the top means it's on the firing stroke.  One full turn puts that cylinder at the end of the exhaust stroke, and since the exhaust valve stays to open a few degrees AFTER TDC and the inlet valve opens a few degrees BEFORE TDC, one or both valves will be tight/compressed when the piston is at the top of the exhaust stroke, so it's easy to tell the difference.
So if either/both of the valves for the #1 cylinder are open (the springs are compressed), the piston is on the exhaust stroke, so you will need to turn the engine one complete revolution so the timing marks are again at the top and both #1 valves are shut (the springs/tappets are loose).
Replace the rocker cover.
The distributor rotor should now be pointing at the notch on the distributor rim.  The stock VW disributors put the rotor arm at the 5 o'clock position for #1, but some aftermarket distributors have #1 at a different position.  This does not matter, so long as you then install the spark plug wires on the distributor with #1 at the position the rotor arm is pointing to, then install the remaining wires in 1-4-3-2 order, clockwise around the distributor.
On the crankshaft pulley, with piston #1 exactly at TDC, make a mark (with white paint) exactly opposite the split in the crankcase if the pulley does not already have a TDC mark (some do, some don't). This will be your TDC mark and the starting point for other timing marks you will make. You will find the timing mark(s) that apply to your configuration by carefully measuring from the TDC point around the rim of the crankshaft pulley.  For example, 30 degrees advance is 46.5mm to the right of TDC.  This is particularly useful if you are using a 009 distributor, which must be timed to maximum advance, rather than set static or at idle.
While you're at it, rotate the pulley 180 degrees and paint a different mark on the pulley there. You can then use this point when you adjust the valves (this is the point at which pistons in cylinders #2 and #4 are at TDC).
~~~
Make Your Timing Marks -
The distances around the pulley (arc distances) for the various 
                  timing marks are calculated using the following formula -
arc distance = 2(pi)(r)(alpha)/360
where -
pi = 3.1416
r = the radius 
                    of the pulley (in mm)
alpha = degrees 
                    of the appropriate arc
(e.g., 
                    the appropriate timing advance).
The arc distances that follow are based on a pulley diameter 
                  of 175mm, thus a radius of 87.5mm. Be sure to measure the diameter 
                  of your pulley and use the radius of your pulley in the following 
                  calculations.
~~~
Timing the Various Distributors -
Note:
The double-vacuum advance distributor must 
                  be timed with the engine idling, using a strobe timing light. 
                  The 009 and single-vacuum distributors CAN be statically timed 
                  at 7.5
o
BTDC, but timing with a strobe light is recommended. 
                  If an electronic ignition system like Compu-Fire or Pertronix 
                  has been installed, the distributor MUST be timed with a strobe 
                  light.
Vacuum-advance only distributors:
From 1961 to 1971, 
                  Type 1 distributors were vacuum-advance only -- they had no 
                  centrifugal advance. These distributors are timed at 7.5
o
BTDC; this point is found by measuring on the rim of the crankshaft 
                  pulley 11.5 mm to the right of the TDC notch.
Dual-advance distributors:
From the TDC mark, measure 
                  on the rim of the pulley 7.6 mm to the left from the TDC notch 
                  and mark with white paint; this is 5
o
ATDC, the point 
                  at which the dual vacuum advance distributor is timed.
009 and SVDA distributors:
Measure on the rim of the 
                  crankcase pulley 11.5 mm to the right of the TDC notch. This 
                  is 7.5
o
BTDC; mark this point with white paint. This 
                  is the point at which the centrifugal advance (009) and single-vacuum 
                  dual-advance (SVDA) distributors are
preliminarily
timed 
                  (the maximum advance at 3500 rpm will be the
final
timing 
                  point for these distributors).
Maximum advance:
From the TDC mark, measure on the 
                    rim of the crankcase pulley 46 mm (for a 175 mm diameter pulley) 
                    to the right of the TDC notch. This is 30
o
BTDC; 
                    mark this point also with white paint. This is the maximum 
                    advance point at 3500 rpm, the timing point for 009 and SVDA 
                    distributors.
~~~
Timing With Stroboscopic Timing Light 
                -
Note:
Timing with a stroboscopic timing light 
                must be done with the engine
warm
. If your timing is so 
                out of whack that the engine will not start, the SVDA and 009 
                distributors can be timed statically to get you in the ballpark. 
                See the
Static Timing
procedure below.
Stroboscopic 
                  Timing Light
The strobe light emits a very bright light which is flashed 
                  from a pistol-like instrument when the #1 spark plug fires. 
                  Be sure to read the instructions that come with the strobe light.
~~~
Setting the 009 Centrifugal Advance, Single-Vacuum 
                Dual Advance (SVDA) and Vacuum-Only Distributors with a Strobe 
                -
Note:
The
approximate
idle timing setting 
                for the centrifugal advance distributor (009), the single-vacuum 
                distributor, and the vacuum-advance only distributor, is
7.5
o
Before
Top Dead Center (BTDC)
. This means that as you 
                view the 7.5
o
mark at the crankcase split (with the 
                strobe), the TDC mark on the pulley will be about 11.5mm to the 
                LEFT of the crankcase split when the distributor is properly timed. 
                Again, this is the APPROXIMATE timing setting at idle.
Important Note regarding vacuum lines:
When timing 
                the vacuum-only distributor, the vacuum line(s) must be attached. 
                The vacuum line on the single-vacuum dual advance (SVDA) distributors 
                must be removed from the vacuum canister on the distributor and 
                plugged to prevent air from being sucked into the carburetor during 
                timing. For BOTH the centrifugal-advance (009) and SVDA distributors 
                -- if there is a vacuum hose running from a port in the intake 
                manifold under the carburetor up to the air cleaner, this hose 
                must be removed and plugged as well, for the same reason. Be sure 
                to plug it such that air will not be sucked into the intake manifold.
Summary regarding vacuum hoses during timing:
Just make 
                sure the vacuum ports on both the carburetor and the intake manifold 
                are PLUGGED so air won't be sucked in during timing.
For these distributors, the advance timing is more important 
                than the idle timing. Ideally it should be 28-30
o
advanced 
                at 3500 rpm, then should return to something close to 7.5
o
BTDC at idle (900 rpm). The centrifugal-advance portions of these 
                distributors vary -- if the maximum advance is set to the correct 
                28-30
o
BTDC at 3500 rpm, an idle timing in the range 
                of 5-8
o
BTDC should result.
Set the parking brake firmly and block the wheels. Put the 
                  transmission in neutral.
Make sure that the maximum advance timing mark (as determined 
                  above) is clearly visible on the crankshaft pulley (i.e., marked 
                  with white paint).
Attach the inductive pick-up clip on the timing light around 
                  the #1 spark plug wire, close to the spark plug and away from 
                  the other spark plug wires to avoid interference. Observe the 
                  arrow on the clip pointing to the spark plug (if there is such 
                  an arrow).
Power to the strobe light is provided through the red clip. 
                  Attach it to a convenient power source. We use the terminal 
                  on the right side of the coil (the one with the wires to the 
                  automatic choke, backup lights and idle solenoid -- terminal 
                  #15). Alternately (and perhaps more conveniently), you can use the positive terminal on the alternator.
Note:
If your car is equipped with a Capacitive Discharge 
                  Ignition system, power to the coil is provided indirectly through 
                  the CDI unit. In this case, just attach the red clip on the 
                  strobe light to any convenient 12-volt power source. As indicated 
                  above, we use the wire to the automatic choke, only because 
                  it's convenient.
Warning!
If you do attach your 
                  timing light to the automatic choke connection, be
VERY CAREFUL
that the black wire from the ignition switch (terminal #15 on 
                  the coil) does not accidentally come disconnected from the choke 
                  connection and drop to touch the alternator body when the ignition 
                  is on. If this happens, you will get a shower of sparks, and 
                  worse -- you will burn out your ignition switch! (Voice of Experience 
                  -- this has happened to me TWICE! You'd think I would learn... 
                  I'm getting good at replacing ignition switches!)
(See our
Ignition 
                  Switch Replacement
procedure.)
Attach the black clip to ground (the bolt on the fuel pump 
                  and the rear carburetor nut are convenient places, but make 
                  sure the wire doesn't become tangled with the fan belt!).
Note:
It's a good idea to secure the timing light 
                  up and away from the fan belt after hooking it up and while 
                  starting the car, to keep the wires from getting tangled up 
                  in the fan belt. Tucking it in front of (front is front, remember) 
                  the stock air cleaner, or anywhere else in the engine compartment 
                  where it is up and away from the fan belt, is a good idea.
Attach the dwell-tachometer in accordance with the idle procedure 
                  above.
Start the engine. Adjust the idle to 900 rpm using the procedure 
                  above.
Turn off the engine and loosen the distributor clamp bolt (10mm) 
                  enough so the distributor requires a strong twist to be moved 
                  but will stay where it is moved to.
Distributor Clamp
Note:
You may find that the nut on the forward end of the clamp bolt turns when you try to loosen or tighten the clamp bolt.  It is difficult to get a wrench on this 10mm nut; we finally kept it from turning by wedging a small flat-blade screwdriver against it.
Stow the timing light, then restart the car. Point the timing 
                  light at the split in the crankcase and pull the trigger on 
                  the timing light. When the trigger on the strobe light is pulled, 
                  with the engine running, the strobe produces a very bright light 
                  which flashes every time the #1 spark plug fires. This bright 
                  light is used to observe the relationship between the timing 
                  mark on the crankshaft pulley and the split in the crankcase.
With the engine idling at 900 rpm, adjust the
preliminary
timing to the 7.5
o
BTDC mark by turning the distributor 
                  one way or the other.
Note:
Turning the distributor clockwise retards 
                  the spark; turning it counterclockwise advances the spark.
Pull the throttle lever down to increase the engine rpm while 
                  you hold the strobe light on the crack in the crankcase, and 
                  watch the marks on the crankshaft pulley in the strobe light. 
                  The TDC mark and idle marks should appear to move to the left 
                  (advance) as the rpm's increase to about 3500 rpm, and the maximum 
                  advance timing mark should come into view.
Turn the distributor one way or the other to set the maximum 
                  advance (at about 3500 rpm) to the 30
o
BTDC mark 
                  you made earlier.
Note:
Stated another way -- with the engine running 
                    at a high rate of speed (about 3500 rpm), turn the distributor 
                    one way or the other to set the spark advance such that the 
                    30
o
BTDC mark appears in the strobe light at the 
                    split in the crankcase.
Return the engine speed to normal idle.
Shut off the engine, and while holding the distributor in 
                  the correct position, tighten the 10mm distributor clamp bolt. (See the note above regarding the nut on the forward end of the clamp bolt.)  Restart the engine and recheck the maximum advance timing.
Allow the engine to idle and, with all of the vacuum hoses 
                  still disconnected and plugged, reset the idle speed to spec 
                  (850-900 rpm) per the idle procedure above.
Check the idle timing and make a mark on the crankcase that 
                  that point. In the future you can set the idle timing at this 
                  point (vacuum hose removed from the SVDA distributor and plugged).
Reattach the vacuum hose on the SVDA distributor, and, if 
                  applicable, to the vacuum port on the intake manifold.
~~~
Setting the Dual-Vacuum Distributor with 
                a Strobe
Note:
These distributors are timed with both 
                  vacuum hoses ATTACHED. If you're not sure which hose goes where, 
                  see our article on
Dual Vacuum 
                  Hoses
.
Make sure that the appropriate timing mark (see above) is 
                  clearly visible on the crankshaft pulley (i.e., marked with 
                  white paint).
Attach the inductive pick-up clip on the timing light around 
                  the #1 spark plug wire, close to the spark plug and away from 
                  the other spark plug wires to avoid interference. Observe the 
                  arrow on the clip pointing to the spark plug (if there is such 
                  an arrow).
Power to the strobe light is provided through the red clip. 
                  Attach it to the terminal on the right side of the coil (the 
                  one with the wires to the automatic choke and idle solenoid 
                  -- terminal #15).
Note:
If your car is equipped with a Capacitive Discharge 
                  Ignition system, power to the coil is provided indirectly through 
                  the CDI unit. In this case, just attach the red clip on the 
                  strobe light to any convenient 12-volt power source. We use 
                  the wire to the automatic choke (though some timing lights, 
                  when connected in this manner, will prevent the engine from 
                  starting -- for a reason we have yet to determine).
Warning!
If you do attach your 
                  timing light to the automatic choke connection, be
VERY CAREFUL
that the wire(s) from the ignition switch do not accidentally 
                  become disconnected from the choke connection and drop to touch 
                  the alternator body. If this happens, you will get a shower 
                  of sparks, and worse -- you will burn out your ignition switch! 
                  (Voice of Experience -- this has happened to me TWICE! You'd 
                  think I would learn... I'm getting good at replacing ignition 
                  switches!)
(See our
Ignition 
                  Switch Replacement
procedure.)
Attach the black clip to ground (the bolt on the fuel pump 
                  and the rear carburetor nut are a convenient places, but make 
                  sure the wire doesn't become tangled with the fan belt!).
Attach the dwell-tachometer in accordance with the idle procedure 
                  above.
Start the engine and allow it to idle at about 900 rpm (if 
                  the idle speed is other than this, adjust the idle in accordance 
                  with the idle adjustment procedure above).
Point the timing light at the split in the crankcase and pull 
                  the trigger on the timing light. When the trigger on the strobe 
                  light is pulled, with the engine running, the strobe produces 
                  a very bright light which flashes every time the #1 spark plug 
                  fires. This bright light is used to observe the relationship 
                  between the timing mark on the crankshaft pulley and the split 
                  in the crankcase.
Note:
When timing the double-vacuum advance 
                  distributor (two vacuum hoses), the throttle valve in the carburetor 
                  must close adequately for accurate timing adjustment. To check, 
                  disconnect the vacuum retard hose (attached to the front of 
                  the vacuum chamber and rear of the carburetor) with the engine 
                  idling. The timing mark should move 15-18mm to the left. If 
                  not, the carburetor needs to be adjusted.
Turn off the engine and loosen the distributor clamp bolt (10mm) 
                  enough so the distributor requires a strong twist to be moved 
                  but will stay where it is moved to.
Note:
You may find that the nut on the forward end of the clamp bolt turns when you try to loosen or tighten the clamp bolt.  It is difficult to get a wrench on this 10mm nut; we finally kept it from turning by wedging a small flat-blade screwdriver against it.
Restart the car and aim the timing light at the crankcase 
                  pulley at the point where it passes the split in the crankcase. 
                  Move the distributor one way or the other until the proper timing 
                  mark on the pulley (as seen in the strobe light) lines up with 
                  the crack in the crankcase.
Note:
The correct timing setting for the dual-vacuum 
                  distributor is
5
o
After
Top Dead Center 
                  (ATDC)
. This means that as you view the 5
o
mark 
                  at the crankcase split (with the strobe), the TDC mark on the 
                  pulley will be about 7.6mm to the RIGHT of the crankcase split.
Shut off the engine, and while holding the distributor in 
                  the correct position, tighten the distributor clamp bolt. (See the note above regarding the nut on the forward end of the clamp bolt.)  Restart the engine and recheck the maximum advance timing.
Note:
When you change the timing, the idle speed 
                  will also change. The reverse is also true. You will probably 
                  have to go back and forth between the idle speed and the timing 
                  several times before you get the timing set exactly right at 
                  the correct idle speed. It's a bit tedious, but well worth getting 
                  it right.
~~~
Static Timing -
Note 1:
This procedure is for use on centrifugal 
                  advance (009) and single-vacuum/dual advance distributors with 
                  points ONLY -- and even with these distributors, it is only 
                  approximate. Setting the maximum advance timing with a stroboscopic timing light is much more 
                  important. Dual vacuum distributors and distributors equipped 
                  with electronic ignition
must
be timed with a stroboscopic timing light.
Note 2:
If you have a single vacuum distributor, 
                  there is no need to remove the vacuum line to static time the 
                  distributor. However, if you are going to use a stroboscopic 
                  timing light, the vacuum line must be removed and plugged so 
                  that air will not be sucked into the carburetor during the test.
Put the transmission in neutral and set the parking brake.
Unfasten the clips that hold the distributor cap (a medium-sized 
                  screwdriver works best for this).
Lift off the cap and find the notch on the rim of the distributor body, 
                  either by sight or by running your fingernail around the rim under 
                  the #1 spark plug wire. You will find the notch at about 5 o'clock on vacuum distributors and about 7 o'clock on the 009 distributor (these two types of distributors are 90 degrees different from one another).
Rotate the engine clockwise with the 19mm wrench on the generator pulley 
                  until the rotor is pointing directly at the notch in the distributor 
                  rim and the crankshaft pulley lines up with the split in the crankcase at 7.5
o
BTDC, then put the cap back on and clip it down.
Note 3:
Make
absolutely sure
that piston #1 is at TDC.  It is possible to inadventently set piston #3 at TDC, which will position the notch on the distributor and the rotor 180 degrees out.  If this is the case, make sure #1 is at TDC by using the
Finding TDC
procedure above, then rotate the distributor until the notch is at 5 o'clock from vacuum distributors and 7 o'clock for the 009 distributor.
Get out your static timing light (just a 12-volt bulb in a 
                  long wire and an alligator clip on one end and any 
                  kind of a metal attachment - a pointy thing - on the other).
Clip the alligator clip to the connection on the coil where 
                  the thin wire (usually green) from the coil to the distributor 
                  is connected.
Turn on the ignition key (DO NOT START THE ENGINE!).
Move the engine backwards a little to take the slack out of the distributor, then clockwise again until the timing park on the pulley (7.5
o
BTDC) lines up exactly with the split in the engine crankcase.
Now loosen the distributor clamp bolt (10mm) and hold the pointy end of the static timing light to ground (e.g., the engine case).  Rotate the distributor clockwise until the test lamp turns off (points 
                  closed), then slowly counterclockwise until the breaker points 
                  open and the test lamp just flashes on.  Tighten the distributor clamp bolt.
Note:
You may find that the nut on the forward end of the clamp bolt turns when you try to loosen or tighten the clamp bolt.  It is difficult to get a wrench on this 10mm nut; we finally kept it from turning by wedging a small flat-blade screwdriver against it.
To check - while holding the pointy end of the static timing light to 
                  ground, rotate the engine backwards (counterclockwise) a little, then slowly forward, watching the 
                  timing mark (7.5
o
BTDC) and the light at the same 
                  time, so when the light comes on you are ready to stop turning the engine.
If your engine is timed correctly, the light will go on when 
                  the 7.5
o
BTDC timing mark is lined up exactly with 
                  the crack between the two halves of the crankcase.
If it's right you're through--if not, loosen the distributor clamp bolt, 
                  and re-adjust the distributor in accordance with Steps #g and #h above, tighten the clamp bolt, and check it per Step #i above. Keep 
                  at it until it's right.
Switch off the ignition as soon as possible.
~~~
Step 7. Idle/Timing 
              Interrelationship.
You have discovered by now that the idle speed and the timing 
                are closely interrelated. Dave installed a new 34PICT/3 carburetor. 
                When tuning the carburetor for the first time, Dave found that 
                the engine was idling too fast (~1600 rpm), but the Bypass Screw 
                was turned all the way in! The timing was set at 7.5
o
BTDC at this idle speed. If you have a similar problem, here how 
                to fix it -
Attach the dwell/tachometer and the stroboscopic timing light 
                  in accordance with the instructions above.
Note:
Again a word of caution -- be very careful 
                  to make sure that the dwell/tach and timing light leads do not 
                  get tangled up with the drive belt while the car is running.
If you have a single-vacuum distributor (SVDA), remove the 
                  vacuum line from the vacuum canister on the distributor and 
                  plug it so that air will not be sucked into the carburetor during 
                  the following process. Any vacuum lines from the intake manifold 
                  must also be plugged, for the same reason.
Begin by turning the Volume Control screw all the way in (not 
                  too firmly) and then back out 2-1/2 turns. This is the
starting 
                  point
for the Volume Control Screw.
Start the engine and run it until it is thoroughly warm and 
                  the butterfly valve in the carburetor is standing straight up.
Check the engine speed (rpm) and the timing. We're assuming 
                  here that your engine speed is way too high and you can't bring 
                  it down by adjusting the Bypass Screw in (i.e., the Bypass Screw 
                  is already turned all the way in).
Retard the timing as much as you can without stalling the 
                  engine. You will note that the idle speed reduces.
Re-adjust the idle speed to 900 rpm by turning the Bypass 
                  Screw out.
Re-adjust the timing to 7.5
o
BTDC, which will once 
                  again increase the idle speed to a setting higher than 900 rpm.
Reset the idle speed to 900 rpm once again with the Bypass 
                  Screw, which will advance the timing.
Retard the timing and reset the idle. Patiently go back and 
                  forth through the steps above; you will finally come to a point 
                  where the idle speed is at 900 rpm and the timing is at 7.5
o
BTDC.
Turn the Volume Control screw one way or the other to obtain 
                  the highest idle speed, then turn the screw clockwise (in) until 
                  the engine speed drops slightly (by about 25 rpm).
Repeat the idle and timing settings if necessary.
Hopefully that will resolve your idle problem. It worked for 
                me.
~~~
Step 8. Check the Coil.
The following is courtesy of
Aircooled.Net
.
First make sure you have 12V going to Terminal 15 on the coil (the positive (+) terminal.
Pull the center wire out of the distributor with a rubber-handled pair of pliers.
Hold the end of the wire about 1/4" from one of the metal clips that hold the distributor cap on.
Have your buddy turn the engine over with the key.
There should be a nice blue spark from the end of the wire you pulled out of the center of the cap to the metal clip.  The spark should look sound and strong and should be easy to see, even in daylight.  If you get such a spark, the coil is like new. If you get a good strong yellow spark, the coil is getting old but is still serviceable. If the spark looks thin and weak (yellow is weak, blue is strong), then the coil windings may be giving out and you will need to replace the coil.
Another test for the coil -
Remove all of the wires from the coil terminals.
Attach the positive and negative, red and black, wires of the Ohmmeter to Terminal #1 and Terminal #15 that are printed (stamped) on the coil.  You should get a reading of beween 3 and 4.5 ohms, which is the resistance inside the coil.  A bad coil will show a higher reading than 3-4.5 ohms - you want less resistance.
Next, place the red or black lead from the meter to the center of the coil (secondary post) and to either one of the terminals, either #1 or #15.  You want 9,500-10,000 Ohms.  Sometimes you'll see less but you don't want to see something like 11,000 Ohms.  If you have no reading in either case, the coil is trash.
If you need to replace the coil -
See our procedure for
Coil Replacement
if you need more information.
Remove the old coil simply be removing the heavy wire that goes to the distributor, then the two 10mm bolts that hold the coil onto the fan housing. Install the new one by reversing the process.
The thin wire coming up from the distributor connects to Terminal #1 (-). The wire from the ignition switch connects to Terminal #15 (+), and the big center wire connects to the center of the distributor.
Try the check on the new coil to see what a good spark looks like.
A note from Bob Hoover
regarding the coil (black vs blue) -
Question:
Is it beneficial to use a Bosch Blue coil with it, or would stepping up the coil help out also?
Bob responded -
Joke, right? :-)
Electrically, the blue coil is EXACTLY THE SAME as the black 
                coil.
The joke here is that the amount of energy going into your coil 
                is determined by the contact area of your points. If the coil 
                used more energy you would need larger points.
The black coil uses varnish & tar in its construction, the blue 
                coil uses Formavar (a high temp varnish) and polypropylene. (Cut 
                them open. See for yourself. No mystery here. But lotsa sales 
                hype.)
In theory, the blue coil should hold up better at higher temperatures 
                but in fact, both coils do about the same.
(You don't really believe all the BS in the ads, do you? :-)
The only time you might need more spark than the stock coil can 
                provide is when you have a very high compression ratio or extremely 
                wide plug gap.
* 
                  * * * *
;
;
;
;
;
Design by
Erin